---
letter_id: "23810"
title: "A letter from R, cantor and convent of Chartres (1107-1120)"
ititle: "a letter from r, cantor and convent of chartres (1107-1120)"
ltr_date: "1107-1120"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-12"
url: "/letter/100.html"
senders:
  - id: 21543
    name: R, cantor and convent of Chartres
    iname: r, cantor and convent of chartres
    type: people
    url: /people/21543.html
receivers:
  - id: 21
    name: Adela of England, Countess of Blois
    iname: adela of england, countess of blois
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>R, humble son, servant, friend, to his sublime mother, ruler/lady, his friend, Adela, with all our convent, the greetings of Gabriel to Mary.
We make a complaint against the provost of Chartres, by name Stephen, who took without any necessary cause six shillings of money from a certain woman, the widow Leticia, who was serving   our brothers of Beaulieu in all things as best she could, which the prior Elias witnessed.  We pray therefore and beseech that without any delay you make him give it back, with that agreement that you remain in all our good will world without end.  Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>R. humilis filius, servus, amicus, sublimi matri domine, amice sue A., cum universo conventu nostro, salutationem Gabrielis ad Mariam.
Conquerimur sub preposito Carnotensium, Stephano nomine, qui cuidam mulieri Leticie vidue, famulanti per omnia fratribus nostris Belli Loci pro posse suo, sine aliqua necessaria causa, sex solidos denariorum abstulit, Helia priore testante:  pro hoc enim nichil voluit facere.  Precamur ergo et obsecramus ut, absque ulla dilacione, facias reddi, eo pacto ut in omni beneficio nostro, sicut jam diximus, permaneas in secula seculorum.  Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Adela is asked by the convent of Chartres to intervene in a case of extortion from a widow by the provost of Chartres.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Lucien Merlet, 'Lettres de Ives de Chartres et d'autres personnages de son temps, 1087-1130,' <em>Bulletin de l'Ecole des Chartes,</em> 16 (1855), 469, ep.34</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1107-1120