---
letter_id: "24704"
title: "A letter from Ermentrud of Orleans (842-62)"
ititle: "a letter from ermentrud of orleans (842-62)"
ltr_date: "842-62"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-08"
url: "/letter/1003.html"
senders:
  - id: 96
    name: Ermentrud of Orleans
    iname: ermentrud of orleans
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21397
    name: Heribold, bishop of Auxerre
    iname: heribold, bishop of auxerre
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the only and omnipotent God, Irmindrud, queen by his ordaining grace to venerable bishop Heribold, greetings.
Since a long illness denies us the pleasing conversation of your holiness, we write to the absent one what we would willingly say to the present.  Your brother deprived of his honors/benefices because of the men who are in his household, very troubled, asked the help of our piety, having confidence that after God our works would help let him escape the harm of his calamity; whom, pitying with customary kindness, we desire to support with God giving the opportunity.  Truly, that the effect of our will can be ready in the palace, we urge you not to be burdened to temper his indigence with necessary provisions. For as your generosity is accustomed to minister to outsiders when asked, it should also offer the same to your indigent brother not without hope of divine retribution:  what we could easily show from holy writings, if we did not believe that that would be superfluous for you and we did not respect your person and ours.  Expend, therefore, the affection owed to religion and necessity and be well, mindful of us assiduously in your prayers.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine Dei solius et omnipotentis Irm[indrudis], ipsius gratia ordinante regina Her[iboldo] venerabili episcopo salutem.
Quoniam diuturna infirmitas gratum nobis vestrae sanctitatis denegat colloquium, absenti scribimus quod praesenti libentius diceremus.  Germanus vester destitutus honoribus, propter homines, qui ei famulati sunt, maxime anxius, nostrae pietatis opem expetiit, confidens post Deum nostra opera se calamitatis molestiam evasurum; quem, solita mansuetudine miserantes, oportunitatem Deo praebente cupimus adiuvare.  Verum, ut in palatio voluntatis nostrae praestolari possit effectum, suademus, ne gravemini eius indigentiam collatis necessariis temperare.  Cum enim soleat vestra largitas ministrare postulata externis, etiam germano indigenti non sine spe divinae retributionis idem valet praestare:  quod facile sacris monstraremus eloquiis, nisi ultro ea vobis occurrere crederemus et nostrae vestraeque personae haberemus considerationem.  Impendite igitur debitum religioni et necessitudini affectum, et in orationibus nostri assidue memores bene valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The queen writes to the bishop about his brother, who has appealed to her since he was deprived of his benefices because of the actions of men in his service.  She does what she can but encourages the bishop to provide for his brother as scripture demands, which passages she would provide if he were not already aware of them.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH, <em>Ep. Kar. Aevi</em> 4, <em>Lupi Abbatis Ferrariensis Epistolae</em>, ep.95, p.84-85.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>842-62