---
letter_id: "24706"
title: "A letter from Nicholas I, pope (864)"
ititle: "a letter from nicholas i, pope (864)"
ltr_date: "864"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-28"
url: "/letter/1005.html"
senders:
  - id: 21483
    name: Nicholas I, pope
    iname: nicholas i, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21483.html
receivers:
  - id: 96
    name: Ermentrud of Orleans
    iname: ermentrud of orleans
    type: woman
    url: /woman/96.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Nicholas, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to Ermentrud, glorious queen.
Your devotion and faith, which we perceive your sublimity has in reverence for the blessed apostles, we give worthy thanks to the lord Jesus Christ in recognition.  For we prefer your gifts offered with different semblance to the industry of the queen of the South, considering not so much wealth as pious affection.  Indeed your gifts were received so much more gratefully by us than those of that queen in that she to a mortal, you rather, dearest daughter to an immortal king and the princes of his church, who happily reign with him and confer the solaces of their intercessions on you, offered gifts not so much corruptible as will remain always and flourishing continually before God.  And think if the gifts of that one, who sent two such small ones into the treasury, would be as pleasing a gift accepted before God, as you think yours would be, when you conferred so much, rather what is greater, you show yourself in devotion and faith to the Lord and his servants with all affection?
May omnipotent God keep you safe, most beloved daughter.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Nicolaus episcopus servus servorum dei Hyrmintrudi gloriosae reginae.
Devotionem tuam et fidem, quam sublimitatem tuam circa beatorum apostolorum reverentiam habere perspicimus, agnoscentes dignas domino Iesu Christo referimus gratias.  Nam et munerum vestrorum diversis speciebus oblatis non tam censum quam pium considerantes affectum reginae Austri industriam tuam praetulimus.  Siquidem tanto coram nobis gratius quam praefatae reginae vestra munera suscepta sunt, quanto illa mortali, tu vero, filia karissima, immortali regi et ecclesiae eius principibus, qui cum eo feliciter regnant et vobis intercessionum suorum solatia conferunt, dona non tam corruptibilia quam semper mansura et ante Deum iugiter florentia obtulistis.  Et revera, si illius, quae duo tantum minuta in gazofilacium misit, tanto est munus coram Deo acceptum, quantum putas vestra fore grata, quae plurima contulistis, immo, quod est maius, temetipsam devotione et fide Domino eiusque servis totis affectibus exhibetis?  Omnipotens Deus te incolomem custodiat, dilectissima filia.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Nicholas sends abundant thanks to Ermentrude for the gifts she sent him, comparing her favorably to the Queen of Sheba.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH, <em>Ep Kar Aevi</em> 4, ep. 28, p.294-95</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>864