---
letter_id: "24708"
title: "A letter from Imma, wife of Einhard (828-36)"
ititle: "a letter from imma, wife of einhard (828-36)"
ltr_date: "828-36"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/1007.html"
senders:
  - id: 97
    name: Imma, wife of Einhard
    iname: imma, wife of einhard
    type: woman
    url: /woman/97.html
receivers:
  - id: 21284
    name: Blidthrut
    iname: blidthrut
    type: people
    url: /people/21284.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To her most beloved sister Blidthrut, Imma your friend and deeply desiring [your] eternal salvation in the lord.
A certain servant of yours from Mosbach by name Wenilo has taken a certain free woman in marriage; and now fearing your wrath and that of his lord Albuin has fled to the threshhold of the saints Marcellinus and Peter.  For which I ask your charity that you deign to intercede with him in my stead so that it be permitted to him to have that woman whom he married with his [Albuin's] and your favor.  I wish you always very well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilectissime sorori Blidthrut Imma amica et bene cupiens tua aeternam in Domino salutem.
Quidam servus vester de Makesbah nomine Wenilo quandam liberam feminam accepit sibi in coniugium; et modo timendo iram vestram simul et domini sui Albuuini confugit ad limina sanctorum Marcellini et Petri.  Pro quo rogo caritatem tuam, ut mea vice apud illum intercedere digneris, quatenus ei liceat cum sua et tua gratia feminam illam, quam accepit, habere.  Opto, ut semper bene valeatis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Imma writes to ask Blidthrut to intercede with her husband in favor of a servant of theirs who had married without permission and fled for sanctuary to the church of the martyrs Marcellinus and Peter which was part of Einhard's and Imma's estates.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH, Ep Kar 3, Einharti Epistolae, ep.37, p.128
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>828-36