---
letter_id: "24722"
title: "A letter from John VIII, pope (875)"
ititle: "a letter from john viii, pope (875)"
ltr_date: "875"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-03-30"
url: "/letter/1021.html"
senders:
  - id: 21439
    name: John VIII, pope
    iname: john viii, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 103
    name: Angelberga of Italy
    iname: angelberga of italy
    type: woman
  - id: 21452
    name: Louis II, emperor
    iname: louis ii, emperor
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the Emperor and Empress
When we came back, with all our shores plundered, we found Saracens living in Fundi and Terracina and in our own home; because of which we did not remain more than five days in the city, although we were detained by not a little harm to the body, we came out with our faithful, of whom with God helping we took eighteen ships.  Many Saracens were killed, but we freed almost six hundred captives.  Therefore it is very necessary that we come to you so that such strength of men may remain on the shores of the sea by whom with our power all things may remain safe and those places which have not yet been plundered, will not be plundered.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[Im]peratori [et Im]peratrici
[C]um reversi fuissemus, omnia littora nostra depredata, etiam et in Fundis et in Terracina velut in domo propria multos Sarracenos invenimus residere; pro quibus non plus quam quinque diebus in Urbe manentes, quamvis corporis non modica detineremur molestia, exivimus cum fidelibus nostris, quorum Deo adiuvante cepimus naves decem et octo.  Sarraceni autem multi occisi sunt, captivos autem fere sexcentos liberavimus.  Ideo vobis venientibus necesse valde est, ut talis in littoribus marinis fortitudo virorum remaneat, quorum virtute nostra omnia salva consistant et ea, que nondum depredata sunt loca, non depredentur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope, finding Rome occupied and plundered by Saracens, has escaped by sea, and asks the imperial couple to keep an army along the shore to protect what is left.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH<em> Ep. Kar. aevi</em> 5. 303, Fragmenta Registri Iohannis VIII, Papae, ep.49</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>875