---
letter_id: "24724"
title: "A letter from John VIII, pope (873-76)"
ititle: "a letter from john viii, pope (873-76)"
ltr_date: "873-76"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-06-06"
url: "/letter/1023.html"
senders:
  - id: 21439
    name: John VIII, pope
    iname: john viii, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21439.html
receivers:
  - id: 103
    name: Angelberga of Italy
    iname: angelberga of italy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/103.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Bishop John to Empress Angelberga.
(1)Among other things.  Up to now the evil has grown and increased, so that by the faction of the Ravenna archbishop, Maurinus with his accomplices who have already been excommunicated and anathematized by us, entered Ravenna and seized and completely devastated the possessions of our faithful, so that he could take the keys of the city of Ravenna violently from our vestryman and at his will, we know not with what authority he gave authority to that archbishop which has never been done in memory.
(2)For I know and I am certain that since the judge to come committed his holy church as it is to us both, rather he asks that it be more honored, more free, more peaceful and more broad than it was when we came to its governance by his disposition.  And therefore we are sollicitous not only for us, but truly also for you, lest it be stained in our time by wrong beliefs, nor, far be it, that we be judged to have shut the gate of eternal life with our hands.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Iohannes Episcopus Angelberge Imperatrici.
(1)Inter cetera.  Ad hoc usque malum crevit et incrassatum est, ut facione Ravennatis archiepiscopi Maurinus cum suis complicibus, qui excommunicati et anathematizati a nobis iam sunt, Ravennam ingrederetur et fidelium nostrorum res cum eis funditus raperet ac devastaret, adeo ut claves civitatis Ravenne a vestarario nostro violenter subtraheret et pro libitu suo, nescimus cuius auctoritate, ipsi archiepiscopo, quod numquam factum fuisse recolitur, potestative concederet.
(2)Scio enim et certus sum, quia venturus iudex sanctam suam ecclesiam ab utrisque nobis non solum qualem commisit, immo etiam cultiorem liberiorem quietiorem amplioremque requiret, quam esset, cum nos ad regimen eius eo disponente accessimus.  Et ideo solliciti sumus non solum pro nobis, verum etiam pro vobis, ne nostris temporibus sinistris opinionibus maculetur, ne quod absit, nostris manibus nobis clausisse sempiterne vite ianuam iudicemur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope seems to be asking the empress for help in his struggles with rebellious Christians in Ravenna.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH <em>Ep. Kar. aevi</em> 5.312, Fragmenta Registri Iohannis VIII, Papae, ep.62</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>873-76