---
letter_id: "24725"
title: "A letter from John VIII, pope (877, March 27)"
ititle: "a letter from john viii, pope (877, march 27)"
ltr_date: "877, March 27"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1024.html"
senders:
  - id: 21439
    name: John VIII, pope
    iname: john viii, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 103
    name: Angelberga of Italy
    iname: angelberga of italy
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Bishop John to his beloved daughter Angelberga dedicated to Christ
Because, dearest daughter, you know that we glow with no other affection towards your than we did, in which we have declared long ago to persist; for your love does not know the shadow of vicissitudes, nor does it suffer defect, since it never fails according to the apostle.  We remind your prudence with these consoling and exhorting letters by the grace of this, lest you forsake in tribulations, “knowing,” as the apostle teaches, “that tribulation brings patience, patience approval, approval hope, and hope does not disappoint” [Rom.5:3-5].  “For all things which are seen are temporal:  what are not seen truly are eternal” [2Cor.4:18].  Fix your heart on these, to these you should cleave with all your roots, dearest; whence your wisdom will have before its eyes the saints who shone as luminaries in the world with the clarity of patience and so move towards the palm of highest vocation with unhindered steps, which they will possess who place their souls in the Lord’s oratory imbued with its patience.  For no enemy death or hand took away what life, which is Christ, and his provident right hand did not transfer to better and restore.  It took the mortal husband, but offered that eternal spouse; whence, as you were called wife of the earthly emperor, now you are said more excellently to be already spouse of the celestial king.  The corruptible diadem is taken away, but the uncorrupted crown is prepared; the adornments are removed which grow old, but ornaments are put aside for you which do not decay.  And what more?  In place of the troubled and imaginary kingdom you see the happy and true empire and truly “this is the change of the right hand of the Highest” [Ps.76:11].   Truly since with the wise you know few things suffice to think many things about the few, we remind your love deservedly with these foretastes that, showing integrity always to our spiritual son Charles, the most pious emperor in pure faith and sincere devotion draws all to his kindness and shows how to keep inviolable faith to him with salutary admonitions.  “For there is no power,” as the apostle says, “except from God” and “who resists power, resists God’s order” [Rom.13:1-3].  We however, since we have chosen him divinely driven as we believe, love him perpetually as our dearest son with every effort,  so that we will hold his friends and enemies to be our friends and enemies.  If what are truly to be mercies granted from him to you through us we believe, as will be allowed to you, you will be able to obtain without difficulty; which we do most willingly in memory of your earlier kindness and that pious emperor for love of God and the holy apostles and us, will concede to a grateful spirit.  We wish your love to be well in Christ, most beloved daughter.
Dated 6th Kalends of April, 10th Indiction.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Iohannes Episcopus Dilecte Filie Ingelberge Christo Dicate
Eo nos, filia karissima, nec alio circa dilectionem vestram flagrare affectu noveris,  quo fuimus, quo etiam olim persistere proposuimus; nescit enim dilectio vicissitudinum obumbrationem nec defectum patitur, cum secundum apostolum numquam excidat.  Huius rei gratia consolatoriis his et exhortatoriis prudentiam vestram litteris commonemus, ne deficiatis in tribulationibus, “scientes,” docente apostolo, “quia tribulatio patientiam operatur, patientia autem probationem, probatio vero spem, spes autem non confundit” [Rom.5:3-5].  “Omnia enim, que videntur, temporalia sunt:  que vero non videntur, eterna” [2.Cor.4:18].  In his ergo cor figi, in his debes totis radicibus inherere, carissima; unde sapientia vestra sanctos, qui patientie in mundo claritate quasi luminaria refulserunt, pre oculis habeat et ita inoffensis ad palmam superne vocationis gressibus tendat, quam videlicet habituri sunt illi, qui oraculo Dominico imbuti in patientia sua ponunt animas suas.  Nichil enim inimica mors vel manus abstulit, quod vita, que Christus est, et ipsius provida dextera in melius non transtulit atque restituit.  Abstulit mortalem illa maritum, sed ista se ipsam eternum obtulit sponsum; unde, que terreni vocabamini uxor imperatoris, celestis iam regis multo prestantius dicimini coniunx.  Ademptum est corruptibile diadema, sed preparatur incorrupta corona; remota sunt decoramenta, que veterescunt, sed reposita sunt vobis ornamenta, que non marcescunt.  Et quid plura?  Pro erumnoso et phantastico regno percipietis felix et verum imperium et revera “hec est immutatio dextere Excelsi” [Ps.76:11].  Verum cum sapienti vobis et que nostis de paucis plura pensare pauca sufficient, his ita prelibatis dilectionem vestram merito commonemus, ut, spirituali filio nostro Karolo piissimo imperatori pure fidei ac sincere devotionis exhibens semper integritatem omnes ad eius mansuetudinem attrahat et salubribus monitis inviolabilem ei fidem servare demonstret.  “Non enim est potestas,” ut apostolus ait, “nisi a Deo” et “qui resistit potestati, Dei ordinationi resistit” [Rom.13:1-3]. Nos autem, quia illum divinitus, ut credimus, acti semel elegimus, perpetuo tanquam filium karissimum omni conatu diligimus, ita ut ipsius amicos et inimicos nostros amicos et inimicos existere teneamus.  Si qua vero sunt vobis ab eius clementia impetranda, per nos credimus, cum vobis libuerit, indifficulter optinere valebitis; quod et nos libentissime pro memoria prisce benignitatis vestre geremus, et idem pius augustus pro Dei sanctorumque apostolorum, sed et nostri dilectione animo gratanti  concedet.  Optamus dilectionem vestram bene in Christo valere, dilectissima filia.
Data VI Kalendas Aprilis, Indictione Decima.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope encourages Angelberga to focus on spiritual matters and give up interfering with politics, in an attempt to make peace between her and Charles the Bald.  It was advice she did not take, and it seems unlikely that he expected or wanted her to.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH <em>Ep. Kar. aevi</em> 5. 42-43, Iohannis VIII Papae Epistolae, ep.44</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>877, March 27