---
letter_id: "24726"
title: "A letter from John VIII, pope (878, April )"
ititle: "a letter from john viii, pope (878, april )"
ltr_date: "878, April "
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-06-06"
url: "/letter/1025.html"
senders:
  - id: 21439
    name: John VIII, pope
    iname: john viii, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21439.html
receivers:
  - id: 103
    name: Angelberga of Italy
    iname: angelberga of italy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/103.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his beloved and spiritual daughter exempress Angelberga dedicated to God.
Since we loved very much with devotion and eagerness of mind the lord and elder Louis once most Christian emperor, our spiritual son, we in no way neglect to keep his memory daily in holy prayers to the Lord and as long as we shall live, know that will be done and we are similarly mindful of you, most beloved daughter.  For with God as witness we desire that your prosperity and health thrive always unharmed and hearing about so many and such adversities which we know you sustained from the sons of this world, we feel compassion for you with great sorrow and grieve with you, since loving you indeed with paternal affection, we consider your sorrow ours and will rejoice that the tranquillity of your life be ours, since you have sustained such unspeakable and unheard of evils, that no scripture of the ancients sings, no history narrates of blessed Peter prince of apostle vicars from whatever emperor or king ever sustained, we know that hearing that what we suffer in these days from count Lambert of Spoleto you are altogether afflicted with similar sorrow.  Whence we urge your love that keeping pious affection of mind towards us you examine those things which are suitable or necessary for our use, you not neglect to act for the powers, since with God propitious, we avidly desire to confer the desired help and consolation in all things according to the power divinely given us and to protect you, if there is need, under the care of blessed Peter the apostle, and we shall be zealous to keep you unharmed like a dearest daughter, if it happens that you come to the threshold of that prince of apostles.   Meanwhile, take comfort in the Lord, who consoles you in all things, and “will not suffer you to be tempted beyond what you can do, but with the temptation will provide what you need to sustain it” [1Cor.10:13].  About the rest, however, which you charged us, occupied by the many impediments which said count prepares and desires to inflict on us with multiple ambushes, we can not carry them out; but if God offers tranquillity and life, those things which are useful to your will we will do with a willing spirit, by which your honor and the force of your glory may appear altogether whole.  May the right hand of the Lord deign to keep you unharmed in all things.
Dated as above.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilecte ac Spiritali Filiae Angelberge Eximperatrici Deo Dicatae.
Quia multum devotione et mentis alacritate dominum et seniorem dive memorie Luudovicum quondam Christianissimum imperatorem, spiritalem filium nostrum, dileximus, nullatenus pretermittimus eius memoriam in sacris orationibus nostris apud Dominum cottidie facere, et, quamdiu vixerimus, facturos esse scitote, vestrique memores, dilectissima filia, similiter sumus.  Nam Deo teste vestram prosperitatem et salutem semper cupimus vigere incolumem et audire et super tot ac tantis adversitatibus, quas a filiis huius seculi vos sustinuisse cognoscimus, ingenti vobis dolore compatimur et condolemus, quoniam quidem paterno vos diligentes affectu merorem vestrum nostrum putamus et tranquillitatem vite vestre nostram esse gaudemus, quia et vos pro talibus nefandis et inauditis malis, que nulla veterum scriptura decantat, nulla hystoria narrat beati Petri apostolorum principis vicarium a quolibet imperatore vel rege umquam sustinuisse, nos his diebus a Lamberto Spoletano comite pati audientes simili esse merore afflictam incunctanter agnoscimus.  Unde vestram hortamur dilectionem, ut circa nos pium mentis affectum conservantes ea, que utilitati nostre congrua vel necessaria esse perspicitis, pro viribus agere non pretermittatis, quia et nos Deo propitio secundum datam nobis divinitus potestatem vobis auxilium et optatam in omnibus consolationem conferre avide cupimus et sub beati Petri apostoli vos, si opus fuerit, tuitione protegere et illesam ceu filiam carissimam conservare studebimus, si ad ipsius apostolorum principis limina vobis venire contigerit.  Interim confortare in Domino, qui consolatur vos in omnibus, nec “patietur vos temptari supra id, quod potestis, sed faciet cum temptatione proventum, ut possitis sustinere” [1Cor.10:13].   De cetero autem ea, que mandastis, multis inpedimentis occupati, que prefatus comes cum multiplicibus insidiis nobis preparat cupitque inferre cottidie, perficere nequivimus; at Deo  tranquillitatem vitamque prebente cuncta, que vestre voluntati utilia sunt, libenti animo perficiemus, quibus vester honor et glorie vigor incunctanter appareat integer.  Dextera Domini vos in omnibus inlesam conservare dignetur.
Data Ut Supra.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope writes in sympathy for the former empress’s sufferings, but excuses himself from doing what she has asked because of his own problems with the Count Lambert of Spoleto.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH <em>Ep. Kar. aevi</em> 5. 77-78, Iohannis VIII Papae Epistolae, ep.82</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>878, April 