---
letter_id: "24730"
title: "A letter from John VIII, pope ()"
ititle: "a letter from john viii, pope ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-06-06"
url: "/letter/1029.html"
senders:
  - id: 21439
    name: John VIII, pope
    iname: john viii, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 103
    name: Angelberga of Italy
    iname: angelberga of italy
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Pope John to Queen Angelberga
All who swear fidelity to the Roman church, that is  to lord Peter or his vicar, are without doubt seen to swear it universally to the whole clergy, who in whatever administration offer divine worship in those consecrated places which especially pertain to rule by the lord pope.  For they do not swear to estates or buildings, but to those  possessing them in suitable worship, since that church is nothing else but the faithful people, but especially the clergy is known by this name.  Therefore depose Wilbert, your marques and our faithful, from whom John, lector of the Roman church, suffered grave and abusive injury, from the position of honor as perjury and sacrilege, if you wish to enjoy our blessing and be counted among catholic daughters, acccording to what we believe you to be.  Indeed it is absurd that he rule over Christian people who is openly involved in perjury or other mortal crime and should be kept away from all common joy according to holy canons for the time of his penance.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Johannes Papa Ingelbergae Reginae
Omnes qui fidelitatem Romanae iurant ecclesiae, id est domino Petro vel suo vicario, omni procul dubio iurare videntur universaliter clero, qui qualibet administratione divinum exibet cultum in ipsis locis sacratis, quae ad regendum specialiter domino pertinent papae.  Non enim prediis iurant vel edibus, sed congruo cultu ea possidentibus, quia ecclesia nichil aliud est nisi populus fidelis, sed praecipue clerus censetur hoc nomine.  Propterea Wilbertum tuum marchionem nostrumque fidelem, a quo Iohannes Romanae ecclesiae lector gravem pertulit contumeliosam iniuriam, sic a dignitate depone honoris uti periurum et sacrilegum, si nostra perfrui benedictione cupis et inter catholicas computari filias, secundum quod te credimus esse.  Absurdum quippe est eum per quodlibet officium dominari christiano populo, qui patenter implicitus periurio vel alio mortali crimine secundum sanctos canones repellendus est tempore suae penitentiae ab omni communi gaudio.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope orders the queen to depose marques Wilbert from office, because of the injuries he inflicted on John lector of the Roman church.  According to  the editor of the letter, Ericus Caspar, we know of no marques of this name during the papacy of John VIII; the letters are not in the register nor in canon collections, but they are preserved in manuscripts.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH 5.332,<em> Iohannis VIII, Papae Epistolae Dubiae</em> ep.5; Jaffe 3030.</p>