---
letter_id: "24733"
title: "A letter from Alexander II, pope (c.1066-67)"
ititle: "a letter from alexander ii, pope (c.1066-67)"
ltr_date: "c.1066-67"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-03-26"
url: "/letter/1032.html"
senders:
  - id: 21213
    name: Alexander II, pope
    iname: alexander ii, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 105
    name: Adelaide of Turin and Susa
    iname: adelaide of turin and susa
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Guido of Milan was suspended from every episcopal office for crimes which he committed and for pride since he presumed to raise himself against the apostolic see, that being determined by the holy synod.  And however he may be or be called bishop elect of Asti, since we can not find that he is blessed in the least by a bishop but rather cursed.  For either the just and legitimate authority of the apostolic see will be annulled, which can not happen, or he will not be numbered among bishops for this reason.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Wido Mediolanensis et pro criminibus, que comisit, et pro superbia, quia se elevare contra apostolicam sedem presumpsit, sancta sinodo id decernente ab omni episcopali officio suspensus est.  Et quemadmodum Astensis electus vel esse vel dici possit episcopus, cum a non episcopo minime sit benedictus, sed potius maledictus, invenire non possumus; aut enim, quod fieri non potest, apostolice sedis iusta et legitima auctoritas adnullabitur, aut ipse electus pro hac causa inter episcopos non numerabitur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Guido, archbishop of Milan, had been excommunicated and was accused of simony by the Patarine leaders.  Alexander suspended him and was upset that Adelaide recognized his episcopal powers by having him consecrate a young bishop, Ingo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Loewenfeld, Samuel, ed. <em>Epistolae pontificum Romanorum ineditae,</em> Graz: Akademische Druck, 1959.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1066-67