---
letter_id: "24735"
title: "A letter from Benzo, bishop of Alba (1080)"
ititle: "a letter from benzo, bishop of alba (1080)"
ltr_date: "1080"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/1034.html"
senders:
  - id: 21272
    name: Benzo, bishop of Alba
    iname: benzo, bishop of alba
    type: people
    url: /people/21272.html
receivers:
  - id: 105
    name: Adelaide of Turin and Susa
    iname: adelaide of turin and susa
    type: woman
    url: /woman/105.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To Duke A[delaide] lady, superlady, B[enzo] faithful and superfaithful, the counsel not of Achitophel but of the holy archangel Michael.  For from childhood, my lady, you do the work of God, therefore with God favoring you will rule after the king of Italy.  Certainly, if you deign to believe the counsels of my smallness, you will sit with tranquillity under the king in the seat of royal majesty, and you will see before you dukes and princes, administering the wealth of the world of lands for you.  In this pleasing [vision] indeed, there will be no danger at all, if it is according to the disposition of my counsel, but there will be lasting joy of your home forever.  What more?  From the day of your coming forth from the womb of your mother no such blessing has come upon you.  And so you, beloved of God and men, rise into the heaven of royal benevolence, to be admired in all the ends of the earth.  This is a secret for you and me and him; do not add a fourth person to the trinity.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Duci A. domnae superdomnae, B. fidelis et superfidelis, consilium non Achitophelis, sed sancti archangeli Michahelis.  A puericia enim, mi domna, opus Dei operaris, idcirco favente Deo post regem Italiae dominaberis.  Certe, si dignaris credere consiliis meae parvitatis, cum tranquillitate sedebis sub rege in solio regifice maiestatis, et videbis ante te duces cum principibus, orbis terrarum opes tibi ministrantibus.  In hoc quidem placito nichil omnino erit periculi, si fiet secundum dispositionem mei consilii, sed erit perpes gaudium domus tuae in seculum seculi.  Quid plura?  A die etenim exitus de ventre matris non venit super te visitatio talis.  Itaque tu, dilecta Deo et hominibus, ascende in coelum regalis benivolentiae, admiranda in cunctis terrae finibus.  Secretum meum michi, tibi et illi; non addas quartam personam trinitati.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The bishop of Alba wrote a metrical letter to Burchard, bishop of Lausanne, Chancellor of Italy, urging him to obtain the alliance of the countess and make her leader of the imperial party in Lombardy (MGH, SS 11.646-47).  Presumably Benzo was then encouraged to negotiate with her and wrote a series of letters in that cause, of which this is the first.  The king referred to is the emperor, Henry IV.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH, SS 11.654, ep.10
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1080