---
letter_id: "24738"
title: "A letter from Benzo, bishop of Alba (1080)"
ititle: "a letter from benzo, bishop of alba (1080)"
ltr_date: "1080"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-03-26"
url: "/letter/1037.html"
senders:
  - id: 21272
    name: Benzo, bishop of Alba
    iname: benzo, bishop of alba
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 105
    name: Adelaide of Turin and Susa
    iname: adelaide of turin and susa
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the lady of the first vowel/name,(1) brother Benzo [sends] the tree of knowledge of good and evil, in the richness of the earth and in the dew of heaven; hear the words of my mouth with  your ears.  Since I am faithful and daily show my loyalty in words and deeds, why do you oppose, o lady, hardness of heart and incredulity to my faith?  Though I am turned to misery, yet through me, his lowest servant, God reveals his mysteries to you.  For placed as clergy in the village of Abens (?Alba), I offer words of heavenly prophecy not falsely.  For if it is pleasing to remember past things, there is no reason to doubt subsequent action.  Therefore the crowd of preceding fathers committed themselves without ambiguity to the oracles of their seers.  That I might refrain from many things, there are certain things to be said about a few.  Jonah escaped from the whale, sat shorn under the ivy, and spoke these few words:  “Forty days hence and Nineveh shall be overturned” [Jonah 3:4].  And the word came to the king.  Who did not call for priests nor his chief augurs.  But he immediately arose from his throne and threw off his garment and put on a sack and sat in ashes; to whom the piety of divine mercy was now present.  The wise king believed the unknown prophet without delay and my lady to whom I am known refuses to believe me?  My prophecies have finally been beneficial through many turns as the whole neighborhood bears witness.  Consider my words are not mine, but without doubt his who said:  “Open your mouth and I shall fill it” [Ps.80:11].  Who therefore spurns me, spurns me to his harm.  And not only spurns me but truly also him who sent me.  Remember, o praiseworthy lady, how much God did for you, and sit humble with Mary at his feet.  Indeed at your cradle the Lord said to you:  “Rise higher” [Luke 14:10], and you rose always by divine predestination from good to better.  Now, however, you must rise to this, that the care of the lands of the world are in your hands.  For God wishes that you bear the burden of the state with him, who rules the monarchy of kingdoms.  For in the spirit and power of Elijah you  will prepare the way for Caesar, until the wanderers are quieted by the old man.  And as Elijah said to king Ahab  “There will not be rain, except by my word” [3Reg.17:1], so, o lady, with the power of the Trinity inspiring, a similar sentence will come from your mouth:  “The Lord lives, so any man will be bishop, or marquess, or be raised to any honor, only by my word.”   O laudable piety of the Redeemer which deigned to raise its handmaid to the height of such honor.  What the providence of God disposed therefore before the establishment of the world, no one should contradict by his negligence.  Indeed the succession of every king of power is preordained before the face of divine majesty.  Say, therefore, o lady, as Mary did to the angel:  “Behold the handmaid of the Lord, let it be done to me according to your word” [Luke 1:38].
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Domne primae vocalis frater Benzo lignum scientiae boni et mali, in pinguedine terrae, et in rore coeli; auribus percipe verba oris mei.  Cum sim fidelis, et cotidies dictis et factis ostendo meam fidelitatem, cur opponis, o domna, meae fidei duriciam cordis atque incredulitatem?  Licet converser in miseria, tamen per me, ultimum servum suum, revelat tibi Deus sua mysteria.  Positus enim in ordine vicis Habiae, non fallaciter profero verba coelestis prophetiae.  Nam si preterita placet recolere, nullatenus est dubitandum de subsequenti opere.  Turba igitur precedentium patrum sine ambiguitate se commiserunt oraculis suorum vatum.  Ut multis supersedeam, de paucis dicenda sunt quaedam.  Ionas autem elapsus a belva, decapillatus sedit sub edera, hubi hec pauca locutus est verba:  “Adhuc quadraginta dies, et Ninive subvertetur” [Jonah 3:4].  Et pervenit verbum ad regem.  Qui non vocavit pulingerios, neque manciani primicerios.  Sed statim surrexit de solio suo, et abiecit vestimentum suum a se, et indutus est sacco, et sedit in cynere; cui mox adfuit pietas divinae misericordiae.  Sapiens rex sine mora credidit ignoto prophetae, et domna mea michi, noto sibi, dedignatur credere?  Per plures denique vices profuerunt sibi mea vaticinia, sicut tota protestatur vicinia.  Revera verba mea non sunt mea, sed eius procul dubio, qui dixit:  “Aperi os tuum, et ego adimplebo illud” [Ps.80:11].  Qui ergo me spernit, ad suum dampnum me spernit.  Et non solum me spernit, verum etiam eum, qui me misit.  Recordare, o predicabilis domina, quanta tibi fecit Deus, et sede cum Maria humilis ad pedes eius.  In tuis quippe cunabulis dictum est tibi a Domino:  “Ascende superius” [Luke 14:10], et divina predestinatione semper ascendisti de bono in melius.  Nunc autem  ad hoc es ascensura, ut in manibus tuis sit orbis terrarum cura.  Vult enim Deus, quo geras rei publicae sarcinam cum eo, qui regnorum regit monarchiam.  Nam in spiritu et virtute Heliae parabis viam cesari, quatenus errantes quiescunt ab homine veteri.  Et sicut Helias, fretus auctoritate prophetica, dixit ad regem Achab: “Quia non erit pluvia, nisi per verbum meum” [3Reg.17:1], ita, o domna, inspirante Trinitatis potentia exiet ab hore tuo  similis sententia:  “Vivit Dominus, si erit episcopus, aut marchio, vel si sublimabitur ad aliquem honorem aliquis homo, nisi per verbum meum.”  O laudanda pietas Redemptoris, quae ancillam suam elevare dignatur ad culmen tanti honoris.  Quod ergo ante mundi constitutionem disposuit Dei providentia, nemo debet contradicere sua negligentia.  Preordinata est quippe series omnimodae potestatis ante conspectum divinae maiestatis.  Dic ergo, o domna, sicut Maria ad angelum:  “Ecce ancilla Domini, fiat michi secundum verbum tuum” [Luke 1:38].
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The bishop of Alba wrote a metrical letter to Burchard, bishop of Lausanne, Chancellor of Italy, urging him to obtain the alliance of the countess and make her leader of the imperial party in Lombardy (MGH, SS 11.646-47).    Presumably Benzo was then encouraged to negotiate with her and wrote a series of letters in that cause, of which this is the fourth.  The king referred to is the emperor, Henry IV.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>(1)The reference may be to the name Adam, within Adelaide, a connection Benzo made in letter 12 <em>Epistolae</em>, 1036.html.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH, SS 11.655, ep.13
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1080