---
letter_id: "24743"
title: "A letter from Henry IV, emperor (1065, May 20)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iv, emperor (1065, may 20)"
ltr_date: "1065, May 20"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-12-14"
url: "/letter/1042.html"
senders:
  - id: 21386
    name: Henry IV, emperor
    iname: henry iv, emperor
    type: people
    url: /people/21386.html
receivers:
  - id: 23
    name: Agnes of Poitiers, empress
    iname: agnes of poitiers, empress
    type: woman
    url: /woman/23.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the holy and individual trinity, Henry king by the mercy of divine favor.   The diligence of all future as well as present should know how we have through owed love granted to our beloved mother, august empress Agnes, a certain court named Gamondo located in the bishopric of Tortona which she held by previous giving over of our father of pious memory, Henry august emperor, with all right in possession in free power so that she may have power of transmitting, exchanging, requesting, delegating or whatever pleases her to do with all its appurtenances that is with the servants of either sex, the dry lands, buildings, markets, tolls, fields, pastures, mills, waters and watercourses, woods, hunting areas acquired or to be acquired, and with all use which now or henceforth might in any way arise thence or be named.  And so that this our royal grant remain stable and undestroyed for all time we have ordered this charter to be composed strengthened by our hand and signed with the impression of our seal.
Sign of lord Henry IV.  [monogram]
I, Gregory chancellor, examined in place of Anno archchancellor.
Dated thirteenth kalends of June in the year of the lords incarnation one thousand sixty five, third indiction.  In the twelfth year of the ordination of lord king Henry IV, ninth of the reign.   Happily enacted in August in the name of God.  Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine sancte et  individue trinitatis heinricus divina favente clementia rex.  noverit omnium industria tam futurorum quam presentium qualiter nos ob debitam caritatem nostrae genitrici dilectae agneti imperatrici angustae quandam curtem gamundium nominatam in episcopatu terdunensi sitam quam antea traditione patris nostri piae memoriae heinrici imperatoris augusti atque omni iure in proprietate habuit in liberum arbitrium concessimus ut inde potestatem habeat tradendi commutandi precariandi delegandi vel quicquid sibi placitum est inde faciendi cum omnibus scilicet pertinentiis suis hoc est utriusque sexus mancipiis areis aedificiis mercatis teloneis pratis pascuis molis molendinis aquis aquarumque decursibus silvis venationibus quesitis et inquirendis et cum omni utilitate quae nunc aut deinceps ullomodo inde provenire vel nominari poterit. et ut haec nostra regalis concessio stabilis et inconvulsa omni permaneat.  evo hanc cartam inde conscriptam manu nostra corroborantes sigilli nostri impressione iussimus insigniri.
Signum domini heinrici quarti.  [monogramma]
Gregorius cancellarius vice Annonis  archicancellarii recognovi.
Datum decimo tertio kalendas iunii anno dominice incarnationis millesimo sexagesimo quinto indictione tertia.  Anno autem ordinationis domini heinrici quarti regis decimo secundo regni vero nono.  Actum augustae in dei nomine feliciter.  Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Henry IV grants empress Agnes, his mother, ability to control the court of Gamondo in the diocese of Tortona.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Manuscript source:</h2>della Comunita di S. Benigno
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Historiae Patriae Monumenta</em>, edita iussu Regis Caroli Alberti (augustae Taurinorum, e Regio Typographeo: 1836), Tomus I Chartarum, cc.611-12.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1065, May 20