---
letter_id: "24748"
title: "A letter from Counts of Flanders (1226)"
ititle: "a letter from counts of flanders (1226)"
ltr_date: "1226"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1047.html"
senders:
  - id: 21305
    name: Counts of Flanders
    iname: counts of flanders
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We, Boudewijn count of Bentheim, Dirk of Altona, Dirk of Voorne, William of Teilingen, his brother the steward Dirk, Jacob the viscount of Leiden and Otto the steward of Zeeland, wish that it be known to all those who will see the present letter that we have sworn in good faith, promising that we will, in accordance with our power, protect the peace and contracts between Joan countess of Flanders on one side, and count Floris of Holland on the other, concerning the land of Zeeland which they should hold in common, (contracts) that were entered into as is contained in their letters granted on each side concerning this.
	Granted in the year of our lord’s incarnation 1226, fifth holiday after Cantate(1) Sunday.(2)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Nos B. comes de Benthem, Th. de Outena, Th. de Vorne, Willelmus de Theilinghen, Th. dapifer frater suus, Iacobus castellanus de Leiden et Otto dapifer Selandie notum fieri volumus omnibus presens scriptum visuris quod nos iuravimus bona fide promittentes quod pacem et conventiones inter Iohannam comitissam Flandrie ex una parte et Florentium comitem Hollandie ex altera, super terra Selandie quam communem tenere debent, initas sicut in scriptis eorum super hoc hincinde concessis continetur, pro posse nostro servari faciemus.
Datum anno dominice incarnationis MCCXX sexto, feria quinta post Cantate
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The counts declare their commitment to keep peace between Joan of Flanders and the Floris count of Holland.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Cantate Sunday is the fourth Sunday after Easter.
2 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299,</em> ed. A.C.F.Koch (Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoo, 1970), ep. 460, 2.63-64.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1226