---
letter_id: "24756"
title: "A letter from Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1246, August 14)"
ititle: "a letter from margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders (1246, august 14)"
ltr_date: "1246, August 14"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-02"
url: "/letter/1055.html"
senders:
  - id: 111
    name: Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/111.html
receivers:
  - id: 21259
    name: Bailiffs
    iname: bailiffs
    type: people
    url: /people/21259.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Margaret countess of Flanders and of Hainaut to all her beloved bailiffs of the land of Flanders and to others to whom the present letters will have come, greeting.
	We commit to you, commanding strictly that you protect and defend all the property of the church of Tozis [Ter Doest] against any attackers and in addition to these things do not allow the same church to be disturbed by anyone.  Moreover we want you to allow the property that the abbot and the convent of the aforementioned church hold in Zeeland to be brought to our regions and to allow ships to go forth and return in order to carry this out.
Granted at Mals in the year of the Lord 1246 on the vigil of the Assumption.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Margareta Flandrie et Haynonie comitissa dilectis suis universis ballivis terre Flandrie et aliis ad quos presentes littere pervenerint salutem.
Mandamus vobis districte precipientes quatinus omnia bona ecclesie de Tozis protegatis et defensetis contra quoslibet impugnantes nec ipsam ecclesiam super hiis permittatis ab aliquo molestari. Preterea volumus quod bona que habent in Zelandia abbas et conventus ecclesie predicte, sustineatis adduci ad partes nostras et naves ire et redire pro huiusmodi exequendis. Datum Malee anno Domini M° CC° XL° sexto, in vigilia Assumptionis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Margaret orders her bailiffs to protect a church and allow free movement of its [mobile] possessions.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 The translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</em>, ed. A.C.F.Koch (Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoo, 1970), 2.323, ep.694.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1246, August 14