---
letter_id: "23816"
title: "A letter from Elisabeth of Schoenau ()"
ititle: "a letter from elisabeth of schoenau ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-27"
url: "/letter/106.html"
senders:
  - id: 22
    name: Elisabeth of Schoenau
    iname: elisabeth of schoenau
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21355
    name: Gerlach, the abbot of Deutz and his brothers
    iname: gerlach, the abbot of deutz and his brothers
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the venerable abbot Gerlach and his brothers, Elisabeth wishes salvation of their souls.
A certain small spark sent from the seat of great majesty and a voice thundering in the heart of a small worm-person admonishes you, saying this.  Rejoice with gladness but not without fear and trembling of heart.  You have among you certain morning stars, shining in heaven before the throne of divine majesty with the brightest splendor.  Be imitators of God and His saints.  Like good emulators, guard yourselves from all depravity and let there not be among you pride and envy and schisms and other vices which fight against the spirit, but be like newborn infants, reasonable without guile (1 Pt. 2:11, 2).  Do not seek to possess anything of your own in this world and do not exercise your own will because you will be told what to do.  You will be holy with the holy ones, just as the Lord said in holy scripture to His faithful ones, “Be holy, because I am holy” (Lv. 19:2).  With blessing has the Lord blessed you, and shown you a treasure hidden in a field for so many years, for such a long time.  In joy have you bought His elect and precious treasure, choice pearls and precious gems (Mt. 13: 44-46).  Know this without doubt:  If you honor them as is proper, they will always stand before the face of God, praying for you and begging for the salvation of your body and soul.
I admonish you, venerable father, extend your pastoral staff and strike the flock of the Lord with all diligence and discretion, lest they walk but haltingly in the way of His contemplation.  You, father, must go before them with the example of good works and lead them with you into eternal life.  There you will find prepared what eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor human heart conceived (1 Cor. 2:9).  May you be offered this by Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, who lives and reigns in perfect Trinity for ever.  Amen. (1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Venerabili abbati G. salutem anime sue et animarum fratrum suorum.  Admonet vos quedam parva scintilla emissa de sede magne maiestatis, et vox tonans in cor cuiusdam vermiculi hominis dicens:  Gaudete cum leticia, sed non sine timore et tremore cordis, habetis enim inter vos quasdam stellas matutinales, radiantes in celo splendore clarissimo ante thronum divine maiestatis.  Estote imitatores dei et sanctorum eius, quasi boni emulatores, et custodite vos ab omni pravitate, et non sint inter vos superbia et invidia, et scismata, et alia vitia, que militant adversus spiritum, sed estote quasi modo geniti infantes rationabiles sine dolo.  Nolite quicquam proprium possidere in hoc mundo, neque voluntatem propriam exercere, quia vobis dicendum est.  Cum sanctis sancti eritis, sicut dominus in scriptura sancta suis fidelibus ait:  Sancti estote, quia ergo sanctus sum.  Benedicens benedixit vobis dominus, et ostendit vobis thesaurum absconditum in agro tot annos, tanta tempora, electum et preciosum et pre gaudio illius emitis eum margaritas electas, et gemmas preciosas.  Procul dubio scitote, si honoratis eas, sicut bene decet, semper assistunt vultui dei pro vobis orante et deprecantes vobis salutem corporis et anime.  Et admoneo te, pater venerande extende virgam pastoralem, et percute cum omni diligentia et discretione gregem domini, ne claudicantes ambulent in via contemplationis eius, et ut tu pater precedas eos exemplo boni operis, et deduces eos tecum in vitam eternam.  Ibi preparatum invenientis, quod oculus non vidit, nec auris audivit, nec in cor hominis ascendit.  Quod vobis prestare dignetur Jesus Christus, filius dei vivi, qui in trinitate perfecta vivit et regnat in secula.  Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The letters transmitted as chapters 5, 6, and 11 of the book of letters were originally appended to the end of Elisabeth’s revelations about the holy army of the virgins of Cologne.  Each of these letters refers, however obliquely, to the cult of the Cologne martyrs.  A large graveyard was discovered outside Cologne in 1156 and the bones, identified as those of St. Ursula and the 11,000 virgin martyrs, were taken to various local religious houses, including the Benedictine abbey at Deutz.  The abbot, Gerlach, sent some of them to Elisabeth to confirm the identification.  For Gerlach’s role in the cult of the Cologne martyrs, see chapters 2 and 4 of that text.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)This translation is copyrighted by Anne Clark.  For permission to reproduce, contact Paulist Press.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Die Visionen der hl. Elisabeth und die Schriften der Aebte Ekbert und Emecho von Schönau,</em> ed. F.W.E. Roth (Brünn: Verlag der Studien aus dem Benedictiner- und Cistercienser-Orden, 1884), Bk.6, ch.5, p.141; trans. Anne L. Clark, <em>The Complete Works of Elisabeth of Schönau</em> (New York: Paulist Press, 2000), 5.</p>