---
letter_id: "24771"
title: "A letter from Nicholas, bishop of Cambrai (1249, August)"
ititle: "a letter from nicholas, bishop of cambrai (1249, august)"
ltr_date: "1249, August"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-02"
url: "/letter/1070.html"
senders:
  - id: 21485
    name: Nicholas, bishop of Cambrai
    iname: nicholas, bishop of cambrai
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 111
    name: Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Nicholas, by God’s grace bishop of Cambrai to all who will view the present letters, greeting in the Lord.
	May your whole society know that we regard the letters of Floris, brother of the count of Holland, regarding the plan of peace initiated between the countess of Flanders and of Hainaut and William her son the count of Flanders on one side and on the other the afore-named Floris, not cancelled, nullified or in any part of it vitiated, in this plan below:
[cites letter 758, July 7, 1248].
	In testimony of this deed we have caused our seal to be affixed to the present letters.
	Granted in the year of the Lord 1249, in the month of August.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>N. Dei gratia Cameracensis episcopus universis presentes litteras inspecturis salutem in Domino.
Noverit universitas vestra quod nos litteras Florentii fratris comitis Hollandie de forma pacis inite inter comitissam Flandrie et Haynonie et Willelmum filium eius comitem Flandrie ex una parte et Florentium prenominatum ex altera, non cancellatas, non abolitas vel in aliqua sui parte viciatas vidimus sub hac forma: (volgt nr. 758).
In cuius rei testmonium  presentibus litteris sigillum nostrum duximus apponendum.
Datum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo quadragesimo nono, mense augusto.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The bishop confirms the agreement between Floris of Holland and the countess.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</em>, ed. A.C.F.Koch (Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoo, 1970), 2.479, ep.824.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1249, August