---
letter_id: "24772"
title: "A letter from Walter, bishop of Tournai (1249, August)"
ititle: "a letter from walter, bishop of tournai (1249, august)"
ltr_date: "1249, August"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-10"
url: "/letter/1071.html"
senders:
  - id: 21614
    name: Walter, bishop of Tournai
    iname: walter, bishop of tournai
    type: people
    url: /people/21614.html
receivers:
  - id: 111
    name: Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/111.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Walter, by God’s grace bishop of Tournai to all who will view the present letters, greeting in the Lord.
	May your society know that we regard the letters of Floris of Holland, brother of the renowned man William by God’s grace king of the Romans and ever venerable, regarding the peace re-established between him on one side and on the other the noblewoman Margaret countess of Flanders and of Hainaut as well as her son William, count of Flanders, not cancelled, nullified or in any part of it vitiated, in this plan below:
[cites letter 758, July 7, 1248].
	In testimony of this deed we have caused our seal to be affixed to the present letters.
	Granted in the year of the Lord 1249, in the month of August.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Walterus Dei gratia episcopus Tornacensis universis presentes litteras inspecturis in Domino salutem.
Noverit universitas vestra quod nos litteras Florentii de Hollandia fratris illustris viri Willelmi Dei gratia regis Romanorum et semper augusd de pace inter ipsum ex una parte et nobilem mulierem Margaretam Flandrie et Haynonie comitissam necnon et Willelmum filium eius, comitem Flandrie ex altera reformata, non cancellatas, non abolitas nec in aliqua sui parte vitiatas vidimus sub hac forma: (volgt nr. 758).
In cuius rei testimonium presentibus litteris sigillum nostrum duximus apponendum. Datum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo quadragesimo nono, mense augusto.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The bishop confirms the agreement between Floris of Holland and the countess.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299, e</em>d. A.C.F.Koch (Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoo, 1970), 2.479-80, ep.825</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1249, August