---
letter_id: "24778"
title: "A letter from Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1245)"
ititle: "a letter from margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders (1245)"
ltr_date: "1245"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/1077.html"
senders:
  - id: 111
    name: Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/111.html
receivers:
  - id: 21382
    name: Henry III of England
    iname: henry iii of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21382.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To her most excellent lord, by the grace of God king of England, duke of Acquitaine and lord of Ireland, his faithful relative,  Margaret  countess of Flanders and Hainaut, greetings and ready willingness to serve with all promptitude his pleasure.
We have understood that our John lord Badercl. burgher of Ypres, has been violently despoiled of 50 pounds sterling in cash within the power of your dominion.
Truly, since that same John because of this came to not a little poverty, we ask your Excellency with all the affection we can, that your royal Majesty deign to order that what was taken from him to restored to our said burgher;  by so doing we will be held grateful to your royal rule and our said burgher will know our prayers prevailed with you.
May you remain in good health for very long times.
Dated on Wednesday after Palm Sunday.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Excellentissimo Domino suo, Dei gratia, Regi Angliae, Duci Acquitaniae & Domino Yberniae, ejus fidelis & Consanguinea Margareta Flandriae & Haynoniae Comitissa salutem, & cum omni promptitudine serviendi paratam ad ejus beneplacita voluntatem.
Intelleximus quod Johannes Dominus Badercl. Burgens. Noster Ipres. In vestrae dominationis potestate, de quinquaginta libris sterlingorum, in numerata pecunia, violenter extitit spoliatus.
Verum, cum idem Johannes ob hoc ad non modicam devenerit paupertatem, Excellentiam vestram omni, qua possumus, affectione rogamus, quatenus vestra dignetur praecipere Majestas regia ut dicto Burgensi nostro restituatur sic ablata; tantum inde facientes ut proinde vestrae dominationi regiae teneamur ad grates, & dictus Burgens. noster preces nostras sibi apud vos sentiat profuisse.
Valeat vestra incolumitas per tempora longiora.
Datum die Mercurii post Ram. Palm.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess asks the king to restore the money taken from one of her men while he was in England.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em> (3rd ed.), 1.1.152.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1245