---
letter_id: "24780"
title: "A letter from William of Holland, king of the Romans (1250, May 19)"
ititle: "a letter from william of holland, king of the romans (1250, may 19)"
ltr_date: "1250, May 19"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-02"
url: "/letter/1079.html"
senders:
  - id: 21629
    name: William of Holland, king of the Romans
    iname: william of holland, king of the romans
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 111
    name: Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>William by God’s grace ever venerable king of the Romans, to all who will view the present letter, greeting and all goodwill.
	Since we desire to observe faithfully and firmly the peace which we have made with the noble lady Margaret, countess of Flanders and of Hainaut, in the tenor of the present we notify all that we, so that we may be obliged more strongly to observe the peace itself, are bound to do and bring about that our dearest relatives, H. elect of Liège, Henry duke of Lothringen and Brabant, Otto count of Ghelre, ______ count of Kleve, through their letters patent oblige themselves to this and promise in good faith to the said countess that, if it should happen, God forbid, that we or Floris our brother or our successors through us or through others should go against the said peace in any way, they themselves will not help us, but they will give advice and favor to the countess herself and to her heirs, the counts of Flanders, against us and our successors, the counts of Holland.
	Enacted at Brussels in the year of the Lord 1250, 14 kalends of June, eighth indiction, in the second year of our reign.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Willelmus Dei gratia Romanorum rex semper augustus universis presentes litteras inspecturis salutem et omne bonum.
Cum nos pacem quam fecimus cum nobili domina Margareta Flandrie et Hainonie comitissa firmiter et fideliter observare velimus, tenore presentium scire facimus universos quod nos, ut ad observationem pacis ipsius fortius astringamur, procurare et facere tenemur quod karissimi consanguinei nostri H. Leodiensis electus, Henricus dux Lotharingie et Brabantie,  Otto comes Ghelrensis, comes Cleuensis per suas patentes litteras se ad hoc obligent et bona fide promittant dicte comitisse quod, si nos vel Florentium fratrem nostrum aut nostros successores per nos vel per alios dicte paci contingeret, quod absit, in aliquo contraire, ipsi nos non iuvabunt, sed ipsi comitisse et heredibus suis, comitibus Flandrie, contra nos et successores nostros, comites Hollandie, prestabunt consilium et favorem.
Actum Bruxcelle anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo quinquagesimo, quartodecimo kl. iunii, indictione octava, regni nostri anno secundo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>William strengthens his agreement with the countess by declaring that his powerful relatives will give their support to the countess if he or his brother or their successors break the agreement.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 The translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299,</em> ed. A.C.F.Koch (Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoo, 1970), 2.521-22, ep.856.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1250, May 19