---
letter_id: "24782"
title: "A letter from William of Holland, king of the Romans (1250, May 19)"
ititle: "a letter from william of holland, king of the romans (1250, may 19)"
ltr_date: "1250, May 19"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/1081.html"
senders:
  - id: 21629
    name: William of Holland, king of the Romans
    iname: william of holland, king of the romans
    type: people
    url: /people/21629.html
receivers:
  - id: 111
    name: Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/111.html
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>William by God’s grace ever venerable king of the Romans to all faithful of the empire who will view the present letters, his grace and all good will.
	May all your society know that, since [disagreement had arisen](1) between us and our beloved brother Floris on the one side and on the other the noble woman Margaret countess of Flanders and of Hainaut concerning the rights and other things that each party claimed to belong to itself in the land of Zeeland, with the venerable lord father P. mediating, bishop of Alban, legate of the apostolic see, peace has been restored between us as is contained in the letters composed thenceforth, and for the restoration and preservation of the said peace the nobleman Henry duke of Lothringen and Brabant at our request has granted his letters that, if it should happen, God forbid, that we should challenge the said peace, he will maintain aid and counsel for the said countess against us, to which letters we give our consent and benevolent agreement by testimony of the present letters.
	Granted at Brussels 16 kalends of June, eighth indiction, in the year of the Lord 1250.(2)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Willelmus Dei gratia Romanorum rex semper augustus universis imperii fidelibus presentes litteras inspecturis suam gratiam et omne bonum.  Noverit universitas vestra quod, cum inter nos et dilectum fratrem nostrum Florentium ex una parte et nobilem mulierem M. comitissam Flandrie et Hanonie ex altera super iuribus et aliis que utraque pars nostrum in terra Zelandie ad se pertinere dicebat, mediante venerabili patre domino P. Albanensi episcopo, apostolice sedis legato, pax sit reformata inter nos prout in litteris inde confectis continetur, et super dicte pacis reformatione et conservatione vir nobilis  Henricus  dux Lotharingie et Brabantie ad petitionem nostram litteras suas dederit quod si contra dictam pacem nos, quod absit, venire contigeret, dicte comitisse contra nos consilio et auxilio adhereret, quibus litteris consensum nostrum et assensum prebemus benivolum presentium testimonio litterarum.
Datum Bruxelle XVI kalend. iunii, indictione VIII, anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo quinquagesimo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>William affirms the commitment of the duke to support the agreement between him and the countess as stated in ep. 857 (1080.html).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 It appears the phrase “discordia mota esset” or the equivalent has been accidentally left out of this version.
2 The translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</em>, ed. A.C.F.Koch (Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoo, 1970), 2.523-24, ep.858.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1250, May 19