---
letter_id: "24783"
title: "A letter from Nicholas, bishop of Cambrai and Peter, bishop of Chalons-sur-Marne (1250, Mary 19-31)"
ititle: "a letter from nicholas, bishop of cambrai and peter, bishop of chalons-sur-marne (1250, mary 19-31)"
ltr_date: "1250, Mary 19-31"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/1082.html"
senders:
  - id: 21486
    name: Nicholas, bishop of Cambrai and Peter, bishop of Chalons-sur-Marne
    iname: nicholas, bishop of cambrai and peter, bishop of chalons-sur-marne
    type: people
    url: /people/21486.html
receivers:
  - id: 111
    name: Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/111.html
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>N. bishop of Cambrai and P. bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne by God’s grace, to all who will view the present letters, greeting in the Lord.
	To all we make known that regarding the damages against the renowned lady Margaret countess of Flanders and of Hainaut, that must be restored to her, (damages) which, through the inquest of the venerable father P. by God’s grace bishop of Alban, legate of the apostolic see, and of the said lady countess inflicted by lord Wulfard and others from Zeeland adhering to the said lady countess with lasting truces which the lord legate has accepted, (such damages) determined up to the sum of one-thousand five hundred Flemish pounds; we, to such degree as each and collectively, have established ourselves as principal debtors, conceding that, if we were not to do the aforesaid, the lady countess herself under our escort without penalty may take possession from our holdings.
	In testimony and protection of this deed we have for the same lady countess caused the present letters to be protected by the affixing of our seal.
	Granted at Brussels in the year of the Lord 1250, in the month of May.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>N. Cameracensis et P. Cathalanensis Dei gratia episcopi universis presentes litteras inspecturis salutem in Domino.
Notum facimus universis quod erga illustrem dominam Margaretam Flandrie et Haynonie comitissam de refundendis sibi dampnis que per inquisitionem venerabilis patris P. Dei gratia Albanensis episcopi, apostolice sedis legati, et dicte domine comitisse domino Wlfardo et aliis de Zelandie dicte domine comitisse adherentibus durantibus treugis quas dominus legatus accepit,  usque ad summam mille et quingentarum librarum Flandrensium invenientur illata, nos, ita quod uterque in solidum, principales constituimus debitores, concedentes quod, si predicta non faceremus, ipsa domina comitissa in nostra conductu sine forefacto capere possit de nostro.
In cuius rei testimonium et munimen presentes litteras eidem domine comitisse tradidimus sigillorum nostrorum appensione munitas.
Datum Bruxelle anno Domini M° CC° quinquagesimo, mense mayo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The bishops assure the payment of damages to the countess.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p><span>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299, ed. A.C.F.Koch (Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoo, 1970), 2.531-32, ep.861
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1250, Mary 19-31