---
letter_id: "24790"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (598, May)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (598, may)"
ltr_date: "598, May"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-09"
url: "/letter/1089.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21362.html
receivers:
  - id: 112
    name: Rusticiana
    iname: rusticiana
    type: woman
    url: /woman/112.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I recall that I wrote to your Excellence awhile ago and that I urged you many times to hasten to see again the threshold of Saint Peter, prince of the Apostles.  And I do not know what great enjoyment there is in the city of Constantinople, or what forgetfulness of the city of Rome; concerning this matter I have been worthy to obtain nothing from you to this day.  For how much it could benefit your soul for the purpose of obtaining the rewards of eternal life; likewise how much it would be appropriate in every way for your glorious daughter, lady Eusebia – [all these things] we closely consider, and you can consider more closely.  But my son Peter, your man whom I know to be wise beyond his age and diligently pursuing maturity, if you seek him, you will discover how great a love there is here among all those dwelling around your Excellence, and how great is [our] desire to be worthy to see you again.  And if, as our Lord instructs, we are admonished by the sacred Scriptures that we ought to love even our enemies, we ought to think about how great a failure it is not to love even those who love us.  But if, perhaps, it is said that we are loved, we know with the utmost of certainty that no one can love those whom he/she does not wish to see.  But if you fear the swords and wars of Italy, you ought to consider carefully how great is the protection of Saint Peter, leader of the Apostles, in this city – in which without a large population and without the assistance of soldiers we have been kept safe amidst swords for so many years. We say these things because we love you.  But may almighty God grant whatever he discerns to be profitable for your soul in perpetuity [and] whatever [he discerns to be profitable] for the reputation of your house in the present.
But the ten pounds of gold which your Excellence sent over for the redemption of captives, my aforementioned son delivered [and] I received [it].  But I ask that heavenly grace, which permitted you to render them as a reward for your soul, also may permit me to dispense it without any contagion of sin: so that we are not tainted by that which you [give in order to] wipe away your sins.  May almighty God, who sees the infirmity of your body and your pilgrimage, out of his grace console you always also through the life and health of my dearest son, lord Strategios; so much may he foster him both for your benefit for a long time, and for his own benefit for eternity, and may he fill you, along with your entire household, with good things in the present, and may he grant that you have heavenly grace.  Certainly we ask that the glorious lord Eudoxius be greeted on our behalf.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>lam dudum vestrae execllentiae me scripsisse et saepius inminuisse reminiscor. ut beati Petri apostolorum principis limina revidere festinet. Et quae tanta sit Constantinopolitanae civitatis delectatio quaeve Romanae urbis oblivio, ignoro; optinere apud vos hac ex re nunc usque nil merui. Quantum enim ad colligendas aeternae vitae mercedes vestrae animae expedire possit, quantum etiam gloriosae filiae vestrae domnae Eusebiae in omnibus congruat, et nos suptiliter attendimus et vos considerare suptilius potestis. Filium vero meum Petrum hominem vestrum, quem ultra aetatem suam sapere et maturitati studere cognovi, si requiritis, invenietis, quantus hic omnium habitantium circa excellentiam vestram amor sit quantumque desiderium, ut vos revidere mereantur. Et si praecipiente Deo sacris eloquiis ammonemur, ut etiam inimicos diligere debeamus, pensandum nobis est, quantae culpae sit etiam amantes minime amare. Ac si forte dicitur, quod amantur, nos certissime scimus, quia nemo potest diligere quos non vult videre. Sin vero gladios Italiae ac bella formidatis, sollicite debetis aspicere, quanta beati Petri apostolorum principis in hac urbe protectio est, in qua sine magnitudine populi et sine adiutoriis militum tot annis inter gladios inlaesi Deo auctore servamur. Haec nos, quia amamus, dicimus. Sed omnipotens Deus quicquid animae vestrae in perpetuum, quicquid opinioni domus in praesenti conspicit expedire, concedat.
Decem vero auri libras, quas in captivorum redemptione excellentia vestra transmisit, praefato filio meo deferente suscepi. Sed peto, ut superna gratia, quae vobis concessit eas pro animae vestrae mercede tribuere, mihi etiam concedat sine aliquo peccati contagio dispensare. ne, unde vos peccata tergitis, nos inde maculemur. Omnipotens Deus, qui debilitatem corporis vestri et peregrinationem vestram conspicit, de sua semper gratia et dulcissimi filii mei domni Strategii vos vita et salute consoletur, quatenus eum et vobis per longa tempora et sibi ad aeternitatem nutriat vosque cum omni domo vestra et bonis praesentibus repleat et supernam gratiam habere concedat. Gloriosum vero domnum Eudoxium nostra petimus vice salutari.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope encourages Rusticiana to return to Rome and those who love her, assuring her it is safe.  Then he acknowledges receipt of the gold she sent to ransom Romans captured presumably by the Lombards.  He sends regards to members of her family.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Angela Kinney.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii I Papae Registrum Epistolarum</em>, ed. Paulus Ewald and Ludovicus Hartmann (Berlin: Weidmann, 1887-91, MGH, 2.23-24, ep.8.22</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>598, May