---
letter_id: "24793"
title: "A letter from Alphonse of Poitiers (5 November, 1263)"
ititle: "a letter from alphonse of poitiers (5 november, 1263)"
ltr_date: "5 November, 1263"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-10"
url: "/letter/1092.html"
senders:
  - id: 21219
    name: Alphonse of Poitiers
    iname: alphonse of poitiers
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most excellent and his dearest sister, Marguerite, by the grace of God illustrious queen of the French, Alphonse, son of the king of France, count of Poitiers and Toulouse, greetings and a will prepared to [do her] pleasure with fraternal love.
Since you asked us by letter to give you aid and succour with our galleys which you sent word that we had at La Rochelle at the expense of the illustrious king of England, we make known to your excellency that we do not know that we have galleys of our own there, and if we had any of our own, it would please us to have you take them to do your will. And if our men of La Rochelle have some galleys or ships, and you, the king of England, or the queen, send your messengers to them, it would please us that they give them over to you to do your will, if it please them. For we would not compel them to do this, since we fear to do them injury and incur sin over it. For what you desire, however, to know with certainty about our state, we thank you, and want you to know that when the presents were composed, we were in a good state, with the Lord granting, which we hope to hear always about you.
Dated Monday after the feast of All Saints, at the Hospital near Corbeil.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Excellentissime domine et karissime sorori sueMargarite, Dei gratia regine Francorum illustri, Alfonsus, filius regis Francie, comes Pictavie etTholose, salutem et cum fraterna dilectione paratam ad beneplacita voluntatem. Cum nos per vestras rogaveritis litteras ut de galeis nostris, quas mandavistis nos habere apud Ruppellam, ad expensas illustris regis Anglie, velimus vobis facere subsidium et succursum, excellencie vestre significamus quod nos non scimus ibidem habere galeas que sint nostre, et si ibidem haberemus galeas que essent nostre, nobis placeret quod eas ad vestram voluntatem faciendam caperetis. Et si homines nostri de Ruppella aliquas galeas seu naves habeant, et vos, rex Anglie vel regina, ad ipsos vestros nuncios mitteretis, placeret nobis quod ipsas vobis traderent, si placeret eis, ad faciendam vestram voluntatem. Nos enim ipsos ad hoc faciendum minime compelleremus, quia timeremus ne eis faceremus injuriam et peccatum super hoc incurreremus. Super hoc autem quod de statu nostro cupitis certitudinem obtinere, exinde vobis regratiamur, scire vos volentes quod in confectione presentium eramus in bono statu, Domino concedente, quod de vobis audire jugiter affectamus.
Datum die lune post festum Omnium sanctorum, apud Hospitale juxta Corbolium
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>In response to his sister-in-law's request for him to aid her sister and brother-in-law, the queen and king of England, with ships, Alphonse replies that he would be happy to help but he has no ships of his own and he can not compel his men of La Rochelle to give their ships.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Correspondance Administrative d'Alfonse de Poitiers,</em> ed. Auguste Molinier (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1894), Collection de Documents indédits sur l'Histoire de France, 2.543-44, ep.2019.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>5 November, 1263