---
letter_id: "23721"
title: "A letter from Emma, queen of the Franks (03/0986)"
ititle: "a letter from emma, queen of the franks (03/0986)"
ltr_date: "03/0986"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-29"
url: "/letter/11.html"
senders:
  - id: 4
    name: Emma of Italy
    iname: emma of italy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/4.html
receivers:
  - id: 21326
    name: empress Adelaide, her mother
    iname: empress adelaide, her mother
    type: people
    url: /people/21326.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To her lady, always imperial empress A[delaide], H[emma] once queen, now deprived of the light of the Franks.
The times of my delights, the times of my beauty have passed, o my lady and o sweet mother, since he, with whom I flourished while he flourished, with whom I reigned while he reigned, my husband until now, has made me a widow for ever.  O bitter the day, the 6th nones of March, which snatched my husband from me, which cast me into these miseries.  Let my pious mother perceive the anguish of sighs of her daughter filled with sorrows.  I would deeply prefer not to be, if the divinity had not left me a mother for my comfort.  O when shall I see, when shall I speak [to you]?
Our people want me and my son [Louis V] to meet with you and king Conrad [of Burgundy, Adelaide’s brother] in the vicinity of Remiremont, at the border of our kingdoms on the 15th calends of June.  But this delay is a thousand years to me.  You should know meanwhile that the princes of the Franks have confirmed by oath their faith/loyalty to me and my son.  About this and other things, we will employ your judgment about what is to be followed, what to be avoided, as you are called the mother, not only of queen H[emma] but of all kings.  Remember, moreover, your words, that you would love my husband because of me and that he would love you because of me.  May these sweet feelings benefit his soul and what you can not show temporally, you may recompense spiritually through holy fathers, bishops, abbots, monks and the most religious servants of God.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Domine A. imperatrici semper augustae H. quondam regina, nunc lumine Francorum orbata. 
Elapsa sunt tempora deliciarum mearum, tempora decoris mei, o mi domina et o dulcis mater, dum is, quo fiorente florebam, quo regnante regnabam, me hactenus coniugem in perpetuum viduam fecit. O amara dies VI n. mart., que, michi virum eripuit, que me in has miserias praecipitavit! Intelligat pia mater gemitum et angustias filie doloribus plene.
Non esse me penitus praeoptarem, nisi divinitas solatio reliquisset matrem. O quando videbo, quando alloquar? Nostri quidem vestre praesentie ac regis Conr. in vicinia Romarici Montis, ubi confinium regnorum est. XV kl. iun. me ac filium meum occurrere volunt. Sed hec mora mille annorum michi est. Noveritis interim Francorum principes michi ac filio simulm fidem sacramento firmasse. In hoc et in reliquis, que sequenda, que vitanda sint, vestro iuditio utemur, ut non solum H. regine, sed omnium dicamini mater regnorum. Recordamini praeterea verborum vestrorum, quod virum meum prae me dilexeritis quodque ipse prae me vos amaverit. Prosint anime eius hi dulces affectus, et que tempolaliter exhibere non valetis, spiritualiter reconpensetis per sanctos patres, id est episcopos, abbates, monachos ac per servos Dei quosque religiosissimos.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Emma, newly widowed, wants her mother’s advice and support.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH BDKz 2 ep.74 p.104-05, dated March, 986; also in HGF9 ep.49 p.287-8 and PL139 ep.75 c.221, same text except that MGH has <em>me hactenus</em> in first sentence and <em>Dei</em> rather than <em>Domini</em> in the last.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>03/0986