---
letter_id: "24805"
title: "A letter from Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1215)"
ititle: "a letter from joan of constantinople, countess of flanders (1215)"
ltr_date: "1215"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1104.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/107.html
receivers:
  - id: 21447
    name: Lambert of Waasten and public
    iname: lambert of waasten and public
    type: people
    url: /people/21447.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Joan, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, for fear and love of God and hope of eternal life and for the care of my soul and of my ancestors, at the request of lord Lambert, once abbot of Waasten, having made use of the counsel of prudent men and of my men, I gave the court of Zoetendale with its appurtenances located next to the wood which is called Esch, to lord Lambert and his successors in pure alms freely and absolutely to be possessed in perpetuity for the service there of God and the glorious Virgin his mother and to oserve canonical life according to the rule of St. Augustine and according to the institution of the order of Arroasia.(1)
I gave also to the same Lambert and his successors six boneria (2) of marshland in the office of Rodenburg and ten in the office of Maldeghem.
Lest this donation be infringed or disturbed in the future by any of my successors or princes or ministers, I strengthen it by the appending of my seal.
Dated at St. Trudo near Bruges, in the year of the Lord’s Incarnation, 1215.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti, amen.
Ego Johanna, Flandrie et Hainonie comitissa, ob timorem et amorem  Dei et spem vite eterne et pro remedio anime mee et predecessorum meorum, ad petitionem domini Lamberti, quondam abbatis de Warnestun, usa consilio prudentum virorum et hominum meorum, dedi curiam Dulcis Vallis cum suis appendiciis juxta nemus, quod dicitur Esch, sitam, domino Lamberto et successoribus ejus in puram elemosinam libere et absolute in perpetuum possidendam ad serviendum ibidem Deo et gloriose Virgini matri eius et ad observandam canonicam vitam secundum regulam sancti Augustini et secundum institutiones ordines Aroasie.
Dedi etiam eidem Lamberto et successoribus eius sex boneria mori in officio de Rodenburg et decem in officio de Maldeghem.
Ne ergo hec donatio in posterum ab aliquo successorum meorum vel principum seu ministrorum aut infringatur seu molestetur, sigilli mei appensione corroboro.
Datum apud Sanctum Trudonem juxta Brugis, anno ab Incarnatione Domini millesimo ducentesimo quintodecimo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess confirms the gift of Zoetendale and adds a gift of undeveloped land.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 The Arroasian order was one of the important 12th century congregations of canons regular of St. Augustine.
2 A bonerium is about a quarter of an acre.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 535-36, ep.4.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1215