---
letter_id: "24812"
title: "A letter from Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1219, October)"
ititle: "a letter from joan of constantinople, countess of flanders (1219, october)"
ltr_date: "1219, October"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1111.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21739.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Joan countess of Flanders and of Hainaut, make known to all who will view the present letters that for the salvation and prosperity of the lord and my husband count Fernand and for mine and for the souls of our ancestors, I have given, as alms to be possessed freely and peacefully in perpetuity by the nuns in the place of blessed Mary in Ten Bossche, six quarter acres (boneria) of marshland, which lie near the marsh of the monks of Bodelo, in the place which is called Coudenborne.
	Therefore so that these alms may remain stable and undisturbed in perpetuity, I have drawn up the present document and caused it to be signed by the affixing of my seal.
	Granted in the year of the Lord 1219, in the month of October.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Johanna, Flandrie ac Hainonie comitissa, notum facio omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis quod sanctimonialibus de loco beate Marie in Bosco, pro salute et prosperitate domini et mariti mei Phernandi comitis et mea ac pro animabus antecessorum nostrorum, sex boneria mori, qui jacet juxta morum monachorum de Bodelo, in loco qui appellator Coudenborne, dedi in elemosinam inperpetuum libere et pacifice possidenda.
Ut hec igitur elemosina inperpetuum stabilis et inconvulsa permaneat, presentem paginam conscribi feci et sigilli mei appensione signari. 
Actum anno Domini M CC XIX, mense Octobri.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess declares her donation of land to the nuns of St. Mary for her and her husband’s and ancestors’ souls.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 542, ep.11.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, October