---
letter_id: "24813"
title: "A letter from Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1220, January 13)"
ititle: "a letter from joan of constantinople, countess of flanders (1220, january 13)"
ltr_date: "1220, January 13"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1112.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21739.html
receivers:
  - id: 21536
    name: public and monastery of Dulcis Vallis
    iname: public and monastery of dulcis vallis
    type: people
    url: /people/21536.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I Joan, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, make known to those both present and future that for the salvation and prosperity of the lord and my husband Ferdinand, count of Flanders and of Hainaut, and for mine, and for the salvation of the souls of my ancestors and thereafter my successors, I have given to the monastery of Sweet Valley 20 quarter acres (boneria) of uncultivated land lying in Est, as alms to be possessed freely and peacefully in perpetuity.
	So that this my gift to the same monastery may remain stable and sure in the future, I have granted to the monastery itself the present letters, validated by the affixing of my seal.
	Granted in testimony at Bruges, octave of the Epiphany of the Lord, in the year 1219.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Johanna, Flandrie et Hainonie comitissa, notum facio tam praesentibus quam futuris, quod pro salute et prosperitate domini et mariti mei Fernandi, comitis Flandrie et Hainonie, et mea et pro salute animarum antecessorum et deinceps successorum meorum, cenobio Dulcis Vallis contuli viginti boneria wastine iacentis in Esth in perpetuam elemosynam libere et pacifice possidendam.
Ut autem hec mea donatio eidem cenobio in posterum rata et stabilis permaneat, ipsi cenobio presentes contuli litteras, sigilli mei appensione munitas.
 Datum Brugis in testimonio, octabas Epiphanie Domini, anno millesimo ducentesimo nono decimo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess donates land to a monastery for the souls of her husband, her ancestors and successors and her own.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 543, ep.12.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1220, January 13