---
letter_id: "24815"
title: "A letter from Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1220, July)"
ititle: "a letter from joan of constantinople, countess of flanders (1220, july)"
ltr_date: "1220, July"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1114.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I Joan, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, make known to all those faithful of Christ who will view the present document, that I have sold to the priest Hugh, my beloved in Christ, son of Martha of Ghent, 20 quarter acres (boneria) of uncultivated land lying in Zaamdonk near the Hague, for which I have taken full payment, to be possessed by hereditary right in perpetuity and to be conferred as alms to any person he will have wished free from any hindrance of opposition, such that for rent of any quarter-acre, 18 cents (pennies) will be paid each year to me at the feast of Saint Remigius.  And if any visitors will have come to reside on the land itself, concerning them I will have my high judgment and tax as I have with my other visitors.
	So that this my sale will remain sure and undisturbed, I have caused it to be committed in writing and to be strengthened by my seal.
	Granted at Ghent, in the year of the Lord 1220 in the month of July.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Johanna, Flandrie et Haonie comitissa, universis Christi fidelibus presentem paginam visuris notum facio, quod dilecto meo in Christo Hugoni, presbitero, filio Marthe de Gandavo, vendidi duodecim boneria wastine, de quibus plenariam sumpsi solutionem, iacentia in Samdonc iuxta Hagam, imperpetuum iure hereditario possidenda et cuicumque persone voluerit absque omni contradictionis obstaculo libere in elemosinam conferenda, ita quod de quolibet bonerio michi ad censum in festo sancti Remigii octodecim denarii annis singulis persolverentur. Et si aliqui hospites venerint manere super terram illam, de ipsis altam justiciam meam et talliam habebo sicut habeo de aliis meis hospitibus.
 Ut autem hec mea venditio rata et inconvulsa permaneat, scripto eam mandari et sigillo meo feci communiri.
Datum Gandavo, anno Domini M°CC°XX°, mense Julio.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess declares her sale of land with an annual rent to a priest to be possessed by hereditary right in perpetuity.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 544-45, ep.14.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1220, July