---
letter_id: "23822"
title: "A letter from Elisabeth of Schoenau ()"
ititle: "a letter from elisabeth of schoenau ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/112.html"
senders:
  - id: 22
    name: Elisabeth of Schoenau
    iname: elisabeth of schoenau
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21589
    name: the sisters at Andernach
    iname: the sisters at andernach
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the sisters at the monastery at Andernach, Elisabeth, humble handmaid of Christ, wishes salvation of body and soul and the joys of eternal life.  A small spark from the seat of great majesty and a voice thundering in the heart of a small worm-person admonishes you, saying:
Rejoice always in the Lord and your souls will delight in fullness (Is. 55:2).  Do not delay in serving your God.  Walk in the way of His contemplation, like beloved daughters, with every humility and love and obedience, without murmuring, without detraction, without envy and similar things, but like young lambs pleasing to the living God.  I will break the chains of your captivity (Jer. 30:8), says the Lord your God, and lead you to verdant pastures at the fore-courts of my tent.  Again I admonish you:  Walk in the way of vision of God with all the attention of your mind, and like wise virgins, prepare your lamps (Mt. 25:1-10).  Love each other just as your heavenly Father has loved you (Jn. 15:12), and bear each other’s burdens (Gal 6:2).  Be merciful, anticipating each other with honor, and take care of the sick.  Give and it will be given to you (Lk. 6:38) and you will receive one hundred fold, not only in this world but also in the next.  Hear the fatherly admonitions of the Lord with free blessing and joyful countenance in body and soul.  And be not only as hearers but as doers of the word of God (Jas. 1:22).  Look at the vocation to which you have been called.  Indeed, God has called you into His marvelous light (1 Pt. 2:9) and has chosen you as His heirs.  With every effort of your mind, look to how you can please your heavenly Spouse so that you may be counted among His elect daughters.  He will crown you with a crown of justice which will be handed over to you on the day of solemnity and rejoicing.  May Jesus Christ our Lord deign to offer it to you.  With the Father and the Holy Spirit He lives and reigns as God for ever and ever.  Amen. (1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>E. humilis ancilla Christi sororibus cenobii Anturnacensis salutem anime et corporis, et gaudia eterne vite.  Admonet vos quedam parva scintilla de sede magne maiestatis emissa, et vos tonans in cor cuiusdam vermiculi hominis dicens:  Gaudete semper in domino, et delectabuntur in crassitudine anime vestre.  Nolite tardare in servitio dei, dei vestri.  Ambulate in via conteplationis eius, sicut filie karissime, cum omni humilitate et caritate, et obedientia, sine murmuratione, sine detractione, sine invidia, et his similibus quasi agne novelle beneplacentes coram deo vivente.  Disrumpam vincula captivitatis vestre, dicit dominus, deus vester, et adducam vos ad pascua virentia usque in atria tentorii mei.  Admoneo vos iterum cum omni sollicitudine mentis, ambulate in via visionis dei, et quasi sapientes virgines aptate lampades vestras.  Diligite vos invicem, sicut et pater vester celestis dilexit vos, et in alterutrum onera vestra portate.  Estote misericordes, honore invicem prevenientes, et gerite curam infirmorum.  Date et dabitur vobis, et centuplum recipietis non solum in hoc seculo, sed etiam in futuro.  Paternas admonitiones domini grate benedictione percipite hilari vultu, corde et animo, et nolite esse tantum, et auditores verbi dei, sed ut factores.  Videte vocationem vestram, qua vocate estis.  Vocavit enim vos deus in admirabile lumen suum, et elegit vos in hereditatem sibi.  Videte cum omni studio mentis vestre, quomodo placestis sponso vestro celesti, ut inter filias ipsi electas computari possitis.  Et coronabit vos corona iusticie, quam redditurus est vobis in die solempnitatis et leticie.  Quam vobis prestare dignetur Jesus Christus dominus noster, qui cum patre et spiritu sancto vivit et regnat deus per omnia secula seculorum.  Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The letter is addressed to the Augustinian convent of St. Thomas at Andernach, a center of women’s Augustinian reform, where three of Elisabeth’s kinswomen lived. It was to them that Ekbert addressed his Death of Elisabeth (<em>De obitu Elisabeth</em>), describing her last days. See also the letter to Guda, magistra of Andernach.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)This translation is copyrighted by Anne Clark.  For permission to reproduce, contact Paulist Press.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Die Visionen der hl. Elisabeth und die Schriften der Aebte Ekbert und Emecho von Schönau</em>, ed. F.W.E. Roth (Brünn: Verlag der Studien aus dem Benedictiner- und Cistercienser-Orden, 1884), Bk.6, ch.9, p.144; trans. Anne L. Clark, <em>The Complete Works of Elisabeth of Schönau</em> (New York: Paulist Press, 2000), 9.</p>