---
letter_id: "24823"
title: "A letter from Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1226, December 21)"
ititle: "a letter from joan of constantinople, countess of flanders (1226, december 21)"
ltr_date: "1226, December 21"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1122.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21546
    name: Rasonus of Gavera, Hugh of Ghent
    iname: rasonus of gavera, hugh of ghent
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Joan, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to her beloved and faithful men, lords Rasonus of Gavera, Hugh of Ghent and to all the patrons of the guests of the church of Saint Bavon of Ghent, greeting and love.
	Since for the release/ransom of my dearest lord and husband the count of Flanders, all his and my people and faithful men must strive, both by honor and by law, and they must prove their good will by deeds, I command to you, and by the faith by which you are bound to me, I advise that as good patrons you not obstruct the abbot of Saint Bavon of Ghent but assist carefully so that he may assess the tax, which he assesses over his people in your protection, so that he may act for the campaign of the release of my lord as swiftly as possible, and that you do this benignly such that I must know myself grateful to you and the said abbot may not be forced to return to me on account of breech of justice; for I should not fail him in this my so arduous matter.
	Dated at Ghent, in the year of the Lord 1226, the Sunday before the Lord’s nativity.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Johanna, Flandrie et Hainonie comitissa, dilectis et fidelibus suis dominis Rasoni de Gavera, Hugoni de Gandavo et omnibus advocatis hospitum ecclesie sancti Bavonis gandensis, salutem et dilectionem.
Cum redemptionem karissimi domini et mariti mei Flandrie comitis omnes homines et fideles sui et mei, tam de honestate quam de jure, debeant affectare et bonam voluntatem suam operibus debeant conprobare, mando vobis et in fidelitate, quam mihi tenemini, moneo quatinus abbatem sancti Bavonis gandensis tamquam boni advocati non impediatis, sed attentius adjuvetis ut talliam, quam super homines suos de advocatia vestra assedit, possit ad expeditionem redemptionis domini mei quam cicius intus agitare et hoc ita benigne faciatis quod grates vobis me scire debeam et dictus abbas pro defectu justicie ad me recurrere non cogatur; ipsi enim in hoc meo et tam arduo negotio deesse non possem. Datum Gandavo, anno Domini M°CC°XX° sex, dominica ante nativitatem Domini.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess orders her vassals not to impede the abbot of St. Bavon from assessing a toll in order to help her raise the money needed to ransom her husband, who was imprisoned by the French.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen ed. Theo Luykx,  Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 555, ep.25.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1226, December 21