---
letter_id: "24832"
title: "A letter from Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1235, March)"
ititle: "a letter from joan of constantinople, countess of flanders (1235, march)"
ltr_date: "1235, March"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-09"
url: "/letter/1131.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/107.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Joan, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to all who will view the present letters, greeting.
	May all your society know that we consider valid and sure the grant of ten quarter-acres of land, lying near the hospital of Oudenarde, which land we have conferred, through the consent and will of the aldermen of the villa of Oudenarde, to the abbey of nuns existing at that time near the said hospital of Oudenarde, which grant the said nuns also made to the aforesaid hospital, and as lady of the land we must cause the grant itself to be held by the said hospital.
	By testimony of the present letters.
	Dated in the year of the Lord 1234, in the month of March.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>J[ohanna], Flandrie et Hain[onie] comitissa, omnibus presentes litteras specturis, salutem.
Noverit universitas vestra, quod nos collationem illam decem bonariorum terre, jacentis iuxta hospitale de Alden[ardo], quam terram per assensum et beneplacitum scabinorum et ville de Alden[ardo] contulimus abbatie monialium, tunc tempore existencium iuxta hospitale Alden[ardo] predictum, quam eciam collationem dicte moniales fecerunt hospitali predicto, ratam habemus et firmam et ipsam collationem debemus facere teneri dicto hospitali tamquam domina terre.
Presentium testimonio litterarum.
Datum anno Domini M°CC0XXXIIII°, mense Martio.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess confirms and secures a grant of land from her to nuns and from them to the hospital they administer.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 573, ep.44.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1235, March