---
letter_id: "24833"
title: "A letter from Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1235, October)"
ititle: "a letter from joan of constantinople, countess of flanders (1235, october)"
ltr_date: "1235, October"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1132.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21739.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Joan, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to all who will view the present letters, greeting.
	May all know that our renowned and dearest former lord and husband Ferdinand, count of Flanders and Hainaut, and we, sold to the nuns of the haven of blessed Mary, of Ghent, 76 quarter-acres of uncultivated land, more or less, lying on Schildwolde near their house, situated in the uncultivated land of 120 quarter-acres, which they had acquired from Bernard of Eine, knight, with the assent of the lord count, Ferdinand, formerly our husband, of pious memory, and with our assent.  We also sold to the nuns mentioned 50 quarter-acres of uncultivated land and 28 quarter-acres of marshland and around five quarter-acres of one grain tithe(1) lying in the parish of Hasnede between Haghe and Trist near the cloister of the same nuns.  We have granted to the aforesaid nuns all the aforesaid quarter-acres of marshland and grain tithe to be possessed minus all annual tax peacefully in perpetuity.  We have had our payment for all the aforesaid sales.
	Therefore for validation and memory of the aforesaid I have caused the present letters to be written and strengthened by protection of our seal.
 	Granted in the year of the Lord 1235, in the month of October.(2)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>J[ohanna], Flandrie et Hainonie comitissa, omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis salutem.
Noverint universi quod illustris et karissimus quonda dominus et maritus noster F[ernandus], Flandrie et Hainonie comes, et nos vendidimus monialibus de portu beate Marie Gandensis septuaginta sex bonaria wastine, parum plus parum minus, jacentis super Sceldevelt iuxta domum earum, sitam in wastina centum et viginti bonariorum que acquisierant a Bernardo de Eine, milite, de assensu domini comitis, quondam mariti nostri F[ernandi], pie memorie, et de nostro assensu. Vendidimus quoque monialibus memoratis quinquaginta bonaria wastine et viginti octo bonaria mori et circiter quinque bonaria unius gaveri, jacentia in parrochia de Hasnede inter Haghe et Trist iuxta curtim monialium earundem. Predicta vero omnia bonaria wastina mori et gaveri prefatis monialibus concedimus absque omni annuo censu in  perpetuum pacifice possidenda. De predictis autem omnibus venditionibus nostrum habuimus pagamentum.
In robur igitur et memoriam predictorum presentes litteras scribi fecimus et sigilli nostri munimine roborari.
Datum anno Domini M°CC°XXX° quinto, mense Octobri.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess confirms two sales of land to the nuns of St. Mary the first made by herself and her husband and the second after his death by her.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1  This “gaveri” could be a variant spelling of “gavena” which Du Cange defines as “donum” or “munus,” a custom instituted by the counts of Flanders pertaining to a right to receive certain measures of grain annually, to be used for protection of churches.  Niermeyer lists “gavalus” as a “corn rent due from arable land.”
2  This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 573-74, ep.45.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1235, October