---
letter_id: "24835"
title: "A letter from Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1237, May)"
ititle: "a letter from joan of constantinople, countess of flanders (1237, may)"
ltr_date: "1237, May"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1134.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21739.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Joan, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to all who will view the present letter, greeting.
	We make known to all your society that William of Tiel, knight, and his wife, have surrendered freely into our hands those portions of the tithes lying in the parishes of Berkin, Ruslede and Tiel, which he held from us in fealty, for the use of the hospital of Oudenarde, under witness of our people his peers and through their judgment he surrendered legitimately and conferred on said hospital whatever right belonged to him to the said tithes.
	We therefore, for the sake of divine piety, have granted the aforesaid portions of tithes complete and fully free from all feudal service to the aforesaid hospital and we confirm it as perpetual alms for the same, excepting its dominion over them.
	In testimony, strength, and confirmation of this deed, we have granted the present document strengthened by the affixing of our seal.
Enacted in the year of the Lord 1237, in the month of May.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Johanna, Flandrie et Hanonie comitissa, universis presens scriptum inspecturis salutem.
Universitati vestre notum facimus, quod Willelmus de Thilt, miles et uxor sua illas partes decimarum, iacentium in parochiis de Berkis, de Ruslede et de Thilt, quas de nobis in feodo tenebat, ad opus hospitalis de Aldenardo in manus nostras libere resignavit, sub testimonio hominum nostrorum parium suorum et per iudicium eorum legitime werpivit et quicquid iuris eidem in dictis decimis competebat, dicto hospitali contulit.
Nos igitur, divine pietatis intuitu, predictas partes decimarum ab omni feodali servitio liberas penitus et absolutas predicto hospitali contulimus et in perpetuam elemosinam confirmamus eidem, salvo dominio ipso in eisdem.
In cuius rei testimonium, munimen et confirmationem, presentem cartam sigilli nostri appensione contulimus roboratam.
Actum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo trecesimo septimo, mense Maio.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess confirms the transfer of tithes from one of her men and his wife through her from whom he held them to the hospital of Oudenarde.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>J<em>ohanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 575-76, ep.47.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1237, May