---
letter_id: "24836"
title: "A letter from Thomas of Savoy (1238, January 16)"
ititle: "a letter from thomas of savoy (1238, january 16)"
ltr_date: "1238, January 16"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1135.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21739.html
  - id: 21601
    name: Thomas of Savoy
    iname: thomas of savoy
    type: people
    url: /people/21601.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Thomas, count of Flanders and Hainaut and his wife Joan, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to all both present and future who will view the present letters, greeting.
	May all your society know that, since master Ghisel of Bruges in (his) last will, with his wife and their freemen providing assent and consent, gave a certain fief by the name of Aunay (?Alnetum), lying in the parish of Orscamp, which he held from us in fealty, as perpetual alms to the hospital of Saint John in Bruges specifically for making pittances on individual days to the paupers lying there, we, desiring very much to become participants of the goods of the said house, have granted the said fief exempt from all feudal right and secular service, to be possessed perpetually, absolutely, and freely by the hospital itself, with our annual tax and jurisdiction remaining to us in the same.
	So that the contribution and grant of the aforesaid fief might maintain the strength of perpetual certainty, we have caused our seals to be affixed to the present page.
	Enacted in the year of the Lord 1237, in the month of January, Thursday after octave of the Epiphany.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Thomas, Flandrie et Hainonie comes eiusque uxor Johanna, Flandrie Hainonie comitissa, universis tam presentibus quam futuris presentes litteras inspecturis salutem.
Noverit universitas vestra quod, cum magister Ghiselinus de Brujis in ultima voluntate quoddam feodum, Alnetum nomine, iacens in parrochia de Orscamp, quod de nobis tenebat in feodum, uxore eius eorumque liberis assensum prebentibus et consensum, dederit in perpetuam elemosinam hospitali Sancti Johannis in Brugis specialiter ad pitantias pauperibus ibidem decumbentibus singulis diebus faciendas, nos, bonorum dicte domus participes fieri peroptantes, dictum feodum ab omni iure feodali et servitio temporali exemptum concedimus ab ipso hospitali absolute et libere perpetuo possidendum, annuo censu nostro et justicia nobis in eodem remanentibus.
Ut autem collatio et concessio predicti feodi robur optineant perpetue firmitatis, presenti pagina sigilla nostra duximus apponenda.
Actum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo tricesimo septimo, mense Januario, feria quinta post octavam Epiphanie.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess and her second husband, Thomas of Savoy, consent to a fief held of them being given to a hospital for the purpose of small allowances to paupers found there.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 577, ep.49.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1238, January 16