---
letter_id: "24837"
title: "A letter from Thomas of Savoy, count of Flanders (1238, February)"
ititle: "a letter from thomas of savoy, count of flanders (1238, february)"
ltr_date: "1238, February"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/1136.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21739.html
  - id: 26186
    name: Thomas of Savoy, count of Flanders
    iname: thomas of savoy, count of flanders
    type: people
    url: /people/26186.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Thomas, count of Flanders and Hainaut, and Joan his wife, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to all who will view the present letters, greeting.
	May all know that we have caused ourselves to be obligated specially to this, that in recent times we have separated in whole or in part in some way the protection and the right, belonging to you for the people and the appurtenances of Gymi, a county of Hainaut, nor will we place our hand further by allotting it as fief or in any other way beyond the consent of the church of Neulobitz, similarly obliging our successors in Hainaut to this same thing in perpetuity.
	In testimony and strength of this deed we have already given to the said church the present letters validated by the affixing of our seals.
	Enacted in the year of the Lord 1237, in the month of February.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Thomas, Flandrie et Hainonie comes, et J[ohanna], uxor ipsius, Flandrie et Hainonie comitissa, omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis salutem.
Noverint universi, quod nos ad hoc specialiter duximus obligandos, quod advocatiam et jus, ad vos pertinens in hominibus et pertinentiis de Gymi, a comitatu Hainonie in toto vel in parte aliquo modo ultimis temporibus separavimus, nec extra manum nostram ponemus assignando in feodum vel alio quoquo modo preter assensum ecclesie de Lobiis, ad hoc idem successores nostros in Haynoniam similiter in perpetuum obligantes.
In cujus rei testimonium et munimen presentes litteras jam dicte dedimus ecclesie, sigillorum nostrorum appentionibus roboratas.
Actum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo trecesimo septimo, mense Februario.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess and her second husband, Thomas of Savoy, declare that they have given up any claims to Gymi in favor of the church of Neulobitz
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 577-78, ep.50.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1238, February