---
letter_id: "23824"
title: "A letter from Elisabeth of Schoenau ()"
ititle: "a letter from elisabeth of schoenau ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/114.html"
senders:
  - id: 22
    name: Elisabeth of Schoenau
    iname: elisabeth of schoenau
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21590
    name: the sisters at Bonn
    iname: the sisters at bonn
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>A voice thundering in the heart of Elisabeth, handmaid of the Lord, has said, “I am a small spark sent from the seat of great majesty.  I speak to you sisters of the monastery in Bonn.”
I advise you to walk cautiously in the way which is contemplation of the Lord, not like the foolish, but like wise and intelligent ones.  This is the will of God.  The days and times of this world are evil and the kingdom of God suffers violence and a great schism from you.  You are like a people who do not know God and you wear your dishonor to God in your bodies.  Return, daughters of Jerusalem, by a different path, one which leads to life.  You still have time in your life and a place for penance.  In heaven sits the one who admonishes you to conversion and if He so determines, He will save you in an instant.  The wise doctor wishes to cure the languors of your soul, first by applying pain, then later gently stroking and applying sweet ointment.(1) In this way He will bind up your wounds, just as once the Savior came to cure the sick.  Do not push away this doctor of salvation until you have received health.  Do not receive unworthily the fatherly admonitions of the Lord.  Indeed, those whom He loves, He corrects, as a loving father admonishes those he loves.  And those who love Him, fulfill His law.  Indeed He should be loved for this very admonition.  Look at the whole world--how it increases then decreases.   Nothing in it is secure but rather is like dust which is blown by the wind and scattered.  In this way the world and all its desires will vanish.  We do not have an enduring city here, but we seek a future one where Christ sits at the right hand of God (Heb. 13:14).  There will be restored to us the drachma which was lost (Lk. 15:8-9), and we will find the reward of eternal life.  May Jesus Christ deign to offer it to us.  He is the Son of the living God who lives in perfect Trinity forever.  Amen. (2)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Vox tonans in cor Elisabeth ancille domini locuta est:  Ego quedam parva scintilla emissa de sede magne maiestatis dicens vobis sororibus cenobii, quod est in Bunna.  Admoneo vos, ut cautius ambuletis in via, que est contemplationis domini, non quasi insipientes, sed ut sapientes et intelligentes, que sit voluntas dei, quoniam dies et tempora huius mundi mali sunt, et vim patitur regnum dei, et scissuram magnam etiam ex vobis, et estis quasi gens, que ignorat deum, et ignominiam dei portatis in corpore vestro.  Regredimini filie Jerusalem per aliam viam, que ducit ad vitam.  Adhuc enim habetis spacium vite, et locum penitentie.  In celo enim sedet, qui de conversione vos admonet, quod et si decreverit, continuo salvabit vos.  Et sapiens medicus concupivit sanare languores anime vestre, primum imponens acerbitatem et postea leniter palpans, et suave unguentum imponens, et sic alligabit vulnera vestra, sicut olim venit salvator sanare egrotos.  Nolite repellere a vobis medicum salutis, quoadusque sanitatem recipiatis.  Nolite paternas admonitiones domini indigne suscipere, quos enim diligit, corripit, et sicut amabilis pater admonet, quos diligit, et qui diligunt eum, implebuntur lege ipsius.  Diligendus autem est pro tali admonitione.  Videte totum mundum, quomodo crescit, quomodo decrescit, et nichil stabile est in eo, sed quasi pulvis, qui a vento sufflatur, et spargitur, sic evanescit mundus et omnis concupiscentia eius.  Non habemus hic manentem, civitatem sed futuram inquirimus, ubi est Christus in dextera dei sedens, ibi restauranda est in nobis dragma, que perierat et inveniemus premium vite eterne.  Quod prestare vobis dignetur Jesus Christus filius dei vivi, qui in trinitate perfecta vivit in secula.  Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>A letter of criticism and spiitual advice to be wise rather than foolish virgins and to correct their ways.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>(1) Cf. Regula Sancti Benedicti, ch. 28, where the wise doctor is to apply gentle therapies (compresses, ointment, and medicine) first, and then, if necessary, the harsher remedies of pain. <br>(2)&nbsp;This translation is copyrighted by Anne Clark. For permission to reproduce, contact Paulist Press.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Die Visionen der hl. Elisabeth und die Schriften der Aebte Ekbert und Emecho von Schönau</em>, ed. F.W.E. Roth (Brünn: Verlag der Studien aus dem Benedictiner- und Cistercienser-Orden, 1884), Bk.6, ch.10, p.144-45; trans. Anne L. Clark, <em>The Complete Works of Elisabeth of Schönau (</em>New York: Paulist Press, 2000), 10.</p>