---
letter_id: "24848"
title: "A letter from Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1242, June 2)"
ititle: "a letter from joan of constantinople, countess of flanders (1242, june 2)"
ltr_date: "1242, June 2"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1147.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/107.html
receivers:
  - id: 21572
    name: sisters of the hospital of Oudenarde
    iname: sisters of the hospital of oudenarde
    type: people
    url: /people/21572.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Joan, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to the sisters beloved in Christ of the hospital of Oudenarde, greeting and love.
	We wish and command to you that you may cause to be dug out and converted for your use the uncultivated land, which our dearest lord Thomas, count, and we, gave to you as alms, concerning which you have the letters of the count and mine, and we have commanded Henry, our bailiff of Oudenarde, to guarantee it for you against anyone.
	Dated at Binche, in the year of the Lord 1242, Monday before Pentecost.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>J[ohanna], Flandrie et Han[onie] comitissa, dilectis in Christo sororibus hospitalis de Auden[ardo], salutem et dilectionem.  Mandamus vobis et volumus, quatinus wastinam, quam karissimus dominus noster Thomas, comes, et nos vobis dedimus in elemosinam, de qua litteras comitis et nostras habetis, circumfodi et ad usum vestrum converti faciatis et mandavimus Henrico, ballivo nostro de Auden[ardo], ut eam nobis  erga quoscumque warandizet.
Datum apud Bincium, anno Domini M°CC°XLIIo, feria secunda ante Penthecostes.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess tells the nuns to cultivate the land she and the count bestowed on them, promising the protection of her bailiff.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 The translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946) 599, ep.71.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1242, June 2