---
letter_id: "24849"
title: "A letter from Thomas of Savoy, count of Flanders (1242, July)"
ititle: "a letter from thomas of savoy, count of flanders (1242, july)"
ltr_date: "1242, July"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/1148.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
  - id: 26186
    name: Thomas of Savoy, count of Flanders
    iname: thomas of savoy, count of flanders
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Thomas, count of Flanders and Hainaut, and Joan, his wife, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to all who will view the present letters, greeting.
	We have received the letters of the abbess and convent of the haven of blessed Mary at Ghent, in this form:
	E., named abbess of the haven of blessed Mary at Ghent and of the humble convent of this same place, to all who will view the present letters, greeting everlasting in the Lord.  May all know that we have conceded all jurisdiction, which we hold in the marshland and lands of 21 half-acres in the parish of Evergem lying toward the marshland of monks in Loes, to the renowned man our lord Thomas, count of Flanders and Hainaut, and the dearest lady and our founder countess Joan, his wife, to be held in perpetuity, such that the estate and revenue, entrance and exit fees and feudal relief should remain to us, and for our revenues to be held legally we can pledge three shillings.  Therefore in strength and memory of the aforesaid we have caused the present letters to be written and signed by the affixing of our seal.   Dated in the year of the Lord 1242, in the month of June.
	We have received benevolently the aforesaid letters and we approve and establish to be observed firmly those things that are contained in the same letters.
	In memory of this deed we have also caused those letters to be strengthened by the affixing of our seals.
	Dated in the year of the Lord 1242, in the month of July.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Th[omas], Flandrie et Hainonie comes et J[ohanna], uxor ejus Flandrie et Hainonie comitissa, omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis salutem.
Litteras abbatisse et conventus de portu beate Marie Gandensis
recepimus sub hac forma :
Omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis soror E., dicta abbatissa de portu beate Marie Gandensis ac ejusdem loci humilis conventus, salutem in Domino sempiternam. Noverint universi quod omnem justiciam, quam habemus in moro et terris viginti et unius bonariorum  in parrochia de Everghem versus morum monachorum de Loes jacentibus, illustri viro domino nostro Th[omae], Flandrie et Hainonie comiti ac karissime domine et fundatrici nostre comitisse Johanne, uxori sue inperpetuum habendam concedimus, ita quod tantum fundus et redditus, introitus et exitus ac relevia nobis remaneant et pro redditibus nostris habendis cum legibus trium solidorum pandare possimus. In robur igitur et memoriam predictorum presentes litteras scribi fecimus et sigilli nostri appensione signari. Datum anno Domini M°CC°XL° secundo, mense Junio.
Nos autem predictas litteras benigne suscepimus et ea, que in eisdem litteris continentur, approbamus et statuimus firmiter observari.
In cuius rei memoriam litteras istas et sigillorum nostrorum fecimus appensione muniri.
Datum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo quadragesimo secundo, mense Julio.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The count and countess make public their approval of the letter from the abbess of St. Mary at Ghent, quoted in full.  She acknowledges their jurisdiction over the monastery’s lands, but retains the revenues of the lands.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 The translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Const</em><span style="font-size: 14.4444446563721px; line-height: 23.3333339691162px; background-color: transparent;"><em>antinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 599-600, ep.72.</span><span style="font-size: 14.4444446563721px; line-height: 1.5; background-color: transparent;"><br></span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1242, July