---
letter_id: "24850"
title: "A letter from Thomas of Savoy, count of Flanders (1242, September)"
ititle: "a letter from thomas of savoy, count of flanders (1242, september)"
ltr_date: "1242, September"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/1149.html"
senders:
  - id: 107
    name: Joan of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: joan of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21739.html
  - id: 26186
    name: Thomas of Savoy, count of Flanders
    iname: thomas of savoy, count of flanders
    type: people
    url: /people/26186.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Thomas, count of Flanders and Hainaut and Joan, his wife, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to all who will view the present letters, greeting.
	May all know that we consider valid the sale which our beloved servant Andreas, our chamberlain, made to the abbess of the haven of blessed Mary at Ghent for 101 measures of land, more or less, lying in Samslacht in the parish of Adendic and at the request of the same Andreas we have conceded to the aforesaid abbess the aforesaid lands, which the lady Heila of Axel, widow of lord Oliver of Axel, held at some time for rent, to be converted/directed half for the use of her monastery and the other half for the use of her hospital perpetually.  And we will be bound to guarantee those same lands to the same abbess.
	Therefore, in strength and memory of the aforesaid we have caused the present letters to be written and strengthened by protection of our seals.
	Dated in the year of the Lord 1242, in the month of September.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Thomas, Flandrie et Hainonie comes et Johanna, uxor eius, Flandrie et Hainonie comitissa, omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis salutem.
Noverint universi quod ratam habemus venditionem, quam dilectus famulus noster Andreas, camerarius noster, fecit abbatisse de portu beate Marie Gandensis super centum et una mensuris terre, parum plus parum minus, jacentibus in Samslacht in parrochia de Adendic et ad petitionem eiusdem Andree predictas terras, quas domina Heila de Axele, relicta domini Oliveri de Axele, ad tempus aliquando sub censu tenebat, predicte abbatisse concedimus medietatem in usus sui monasterii et aliam medietatem in usus hospitalis sui perpetuo convertendas. Et easdem terras eidem abbatisse tenebimur garandire.
In robur igitur et memoriam predictorum presentes litteras scribi fecimus et sigillorum nostrorum munimine roborari.
Datum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo quadragesimo secundo, mense Septembri.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The count and countess confirm and approve a sale of land by their chamberlain to the abbey of St. Mary, to be put to the use of the monastery and the hospital equally.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 The translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 600-01, ep.73.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1242, September