---
letter_id: "24857"
title: "A letter from Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders (1248, January 7)"
ititle: "a letter from margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders (1248, january 7)"
ltr_date: "1248, January 7"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-02"
url: "/letter/1156.html"
senders:
  - id: 111
    name: Margaret of Constantinople, Countess of Flanders
    iname: margaret of constantinople, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/111.html
receivers:
  - id: 21262
    name: bailiffs of Bruges and Ghent
    iname: bailiffs of bruges and ghent
    type: people
    url: /people/21262.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Margaret, countess of Flanders and Hainaut, to her beloved bailiffs of Bruges and Ghent, greeting and love.
	Since the dearest lady our sister Joan, of happy memory, formerly countess of Flanders and Hainaut, and count Ferdinand, conferred as alms to the hospital of St. John in Bruges 10 quarter-acres of marshland lying in the district of Maldenghiem, we command and firmly order that you not permit any of your bailiffs to harm the said hospital in the aforesaid marshland or trouble the messengers of said hospital, if they come to you to complain about anything, [rather] assisting them manfully by advice and aid through you and your serjeants.
	Dated in the year of the Lord 1247, on the morrow of the Epiphany.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Margareta, Flandrie et Haynonie comitissa, dilectis suis de Brugis et de Gandavo ballivis salutem et dilectionem.
Cum karissima domina soror nostra J[ohanna], felicis memorie, quondam Flandrie et Haynonie comitissa, et comes Fernandus in elemosinam contulerint hospitali sancti Johannis in Brugis decem bonaria mori, jacentis in officio de Maldenghiem, vobis mandamus et firmiter precipimus quatinus non permittatis quod aliquis de balliviis vestris dicto hospitali in moro predicto molestiam inferat vel gravamen nunciis dicti hospitalis, si ad vos venerint super aliquo conquesturi, consilio et auxilio per vos et per servientes vestros viriliter assistentes.
Datum anno Domini M°CC°XL° septimo, in crastino Epiphanie.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess directs her bailiffs not to harm the land donated by her sister Joan and brother-in-law Ferdinand (Joan’s first husband), to a hospital, but to assist them when requested.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 The translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Johanna van Constantinopel, Gravin van Vlaanderen en Henegouwen</em> ed. Theo Luykx, Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamsche Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schoone Kunsten van Belgie, Klasse der Letteren, VIII.5 (1946), 618-19, ep.85.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1248, January 7