---
letter_id: "24859"
title: "A letter from Adelaide/Aleid of Holland (1258, July 11)"
ititle: "a letter from adelaide/aleid of holland (1258, july 11)"
ltr_date: "1258, July 11"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-13"
url: "/letter/1158.html"
senders:
  - id: 113
    name: Aleid/Adelaide of Holland
    iname: aleid/adelaide of holland
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We, Adelaide, lady of Hainaut, defender of Holland and Zeeland, make known to all that we, for the sake of divine reward, have granted to the nuns in Beselinge right of tithe which by law they should have to the tithe which lord Wolfard had granted by charter to them, just as is contained more fully in the letter of said Wolfard prepared concerning this.
	In testimony of this deed we have caused our seal to be affixed to the present letter.
	Dated at Hondinge in the year of the Lord 1258, Thursday after the octave of the apostles Peter and Paul.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Nos Aleidis domina de Haynonia, tutrix Hollandie et Zelandie, notum facimus universis quod nos divine remunerationis intuitu concessimus sanctimonialibus in Beselinge ius decime quod de iure debent habere in decima quam dominus Wulfardus eis conscripserat, prout in littera dicti Wolfardi super hoc confecta plenius continetur.
In cuius rei testimonium presenti littere sigillum nostrum fecimus appendi.
Datum apud Hondinge anno Domini MoCCo LVIIIo, feria quinta post octavam Petri et Pauli apostolorum.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess confirms the granting of a right of tithe to nuns of Beselinge.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</em>, ed. A.C.F.Koch (Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoo, 1970), ep.1187, 3.187-88.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1258, July 11