---
letter_id: "23827"
title: "A letter from Elisabeth of Schoenau ()"
ititle: "a letter from elisabeth of schoenau ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/117.html"
senders:
  - id: 22
    name: Elisabeth of Schoenau
    iname: elisabeth of schoenau
    type: woman
    url: /woman/22.html
receivers:
  - id: 21575
    name: the abbess of Dietkirchen
    iname: the abbess of dietkirchen
    type: people
    url: /people/21575.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Greetings from Elisabeth to the most beloved abbess of Dietkirchen.  I, a lowly worm-person, broken down and exhausted by the many miseries of this world, send every debt of prayer so that God may impart to you the reward which I obtain in my own soul only with His grace.
Most beloved, I admonish you, be strong and vigorous against the ambushes of the crafty serpent who lies in ambush for your heel (Gn. 3:15) and has set snares for you through the envy of many.  Know for certain that those who set snares for you will themselves fall into them.  And you, daughter of Jerusalem, joyfully walk in the way of contemplation of the Lord, running well in charity, chastity, prudence, and humility.  Act manfully and let your heart be strengthened and endure the temptations of this world.  It is through many temptations that we enter into the kingdom of God.  God has planted a vineyard in the place where you live, and some beautiful little branches have sprouted there and they will bear fruit pleasing to God.  Thorns and thistles have also grown there and they are useless.  What do you think that the Lord will do to His vineyard when it does not bear fruit acceptable to Him?  Without doubt He will tear out the unfruitful ones and send them into the fiery furnace.(1)
With all the attention of your mind, extend your pastoral staff around those subject to you, whom you have undertaken to govern and guard.  Strike strongly and gently, arrange all things with discretion, with fear of God, and with all humility.  The higher you are, the lower you should be; indeed, humility is the great virtue by which one arrives at a crown.  And now, rejoice and be glad in Him who has consecrated you for Himself and enabled your soul to be the bride of God, the bride of the King, the bride of the most dazzling Lamb who walks before you.  Let it be sweet to run after His footsteps.  Do not turn aside to the right or the left and in this way you shall come to Him.  He will lead you into the upper room of His tent, you will eat with Him and He with you.  There you will always rejoice with the angels.  There will be cinnamon and balsam and the sweetest aroma.  There will be the harmonies of the saints and the lovely song will resound before the throne of God.  There no weakness will disturb, no tribulation will trouble.  May God deign to offer you this joy.  He lives and reigns for infinite ages and ages.  Amen. (2)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>E. dilectissime abbatisse de Dietkirchen. Ego humilis vermiculus, que iaceo et plurimum fatigor in multis miseriis huius mundi, omne debitum orationis et quod participet te deus mercedis, quam mereor in anima mea cum gratia ipsius. Karissima; admoneo te, confortare et esto robusta contra insidias callidi serpentis, qui insidiatur calcaneo tuo, et posuit tibi laqueos per multorum invidiam. Scias pro certo, qui tibi posuerunt laqueos, ipsi in laqueum cadent. Et tu filia Jerusalem gratulanter ambula in via contemplationis domini, currendo bene in caritate, in castitate, prudentia et humilitate. Viriliter age et confortetur cor tuum, et sustine temptationes huius mundi. Per multas enim temptationes oportet nos introire in regnum dei. Plantavit enim deus vineam in eo loco, ubi habitas, et germinaverunt ibi quidam ramusculi pulcherrimi, et fecerunt fructum acceptabilcm deo. Creverunt etiam ibi spine et tribuli et que inutilia sunt, Et quid putas, facturus est dominus vinee sue, ubi non fecerit ei fructum acceptabilem? Procul dubio eradicabit infructuosa eius, et mittet in caminum ignis. Extende tu virgam pastoralem cum omni sollicitudine mentis circa subditas, quas regere suscepisti et custodire. Percute fortiter suaviterque, omnia dispone cum discretione, cum timore dei, cum omni humililate. Quanto sublimior es, tanto humilior sis, humilitas enim magna virtus est, qua pervenitur ad coronam. Et nunc gaude et letare in eo, qui te sibi consecravit, et fecit, ut sit anima tua sponsa dei, sponsa regis, sponsa agni candidissimi, qui te precedit. Dulce sit tibi currere post vestigia eins. Noli declinare ad dexteram neque ad sinistram, et sic pervenies ad evim, et introducet te in cenaculum tentorii sui et cenabis cum eo et ipse tecum. Ibi semper letaberis cum angelis, ibi cynamomum et balsamum, odor suavissimus, ibi organa sanctorum et carmen amabile resonat ante thronum dei, ibi nulla infirmi tas exagitat, nulla tribulatio perturbat. Hanc leticiam tibi prestare dignetur, qui in trinitate perfecta vivit et regnat deus per infinita secula seculorum. Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>A letter of spiritual advice, abbatial responsibility, and heavenly rewards.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) Although there is no direct quotation, this passage is reminiscent of the song of the vineyard in Isaiah 5:1-6.  
(2) This translation is copyrighted by Anne Clark. For permission to reproduce, contact Paulist Press.<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Die Visionen der hl. Elisabeth und die Schriften der Aebte Ekbert und Emecho von Schönau</em>, ed. F.W.E. Roth (Brünn: Verlag der Studien aus dem Benedictiner- und Cistercienser-Orden, 1884), Bk.6, ch.13, p.146; trans. Anne L. Clark, <em>The Complete Works of Elisabeth of Schönau</em> (New York: Paulist Press, 2000), 13.&nbsp;</p>