---
letter_id: "24876"
title: "A letter from Henry, bishop of Utrecht (1264, May 14)"
ititle: "a letter from henry, bishop of utrecht (1264, may 14)"
ltr_date: "1264, May 14"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-13"
url: "/letter/1175.html"
senders:
  - id: 21389
    name: Henry, bishop of Utrecht
    iname: henry, bishop of utrecht
    type: people
    url: /people/21389.html
receivers:
  - id: 113
    name: Aleid/Adelaide of Holland
    iname: aleid/adelaide of holland
    type: woman
    url: /woman/113.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Henry, by God’s grace bishop of Utrecht, to his beloved relative lady Adelaide, formerly wife of lord John of Avesnes, greeting with sincere love.
	Since all tithes of newly tilled land should belong to us by right, we command to you, in virtue of holy obedience, by advising firmly that you collect and cause [them] to be collected, reserving them for our use until we will have announced to you what we have shall have caused to be done with them.
	Dated at Utrecht in the year of the Lord 1264, on the morrow of blessed Servatius.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Henricus Dei gratia Traiactensis episcopus dilecte consanguinee sue domine Alaydi, uxori quondam domini Iohannis de Avesnis, salutem cum dilectione syncera.
Cum omnes decime novalium ad nos de iure pertineant, vobis mandamus in virtute sancte obedientie firmissime precipiendo quatinus colligatis et colligere faciatis, reservantes eas ad usus nostros donec vobis intimaverimus quod inde duxerimus faciendum.
Datum Traiecti anno Domini MoCC LXo quarto, in crastino beati Seruacii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The bishop tells Adelaide to collect and hold tithes that are his by right.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</em>, ed. A.C.F.Koch (Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoo, 1970), ep.1352, 3..374-75.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1264, May 14