---
letter_id: "23722"
title: "A letter from Emma, queen of the Franks (986-987)"
ititle: "a letter from emma, queen of the franks (986-987)"
ltr_date: "986-987"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-27"
url: "/letter/12.html"
senders:
  - id: 4
    name: Emma of Italy
    iname: emma of italy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/4.html
receivers:
  - id: 21326
    name: empress Adelaide, her mother
    iname: empress adelaide, her mother
    type: people
    url: /people/21326.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>My sorrow is aggravated, o my lady, o sweet name of mother.  When I lost my husband, there was hope in my son.  He has become an enemy.  My once sweetest friends have withdrawn from me.  To my shame and that of my whole family they have fabricated unspeakable things against the bishop of Laon.  They persecute him and strive to despoil him of his honor/position to brand me with eternal ignominy that would be a most just cause of losing my honor/position.  Pious mother, be there for your daughter filled with sorrow.

My enemies exult that no brother, kinsman, or friend, survived, who might have brought me aid.  May the pious ruler/lady give her attention to these things:  may your daughter-in-law [empress Theophanu] renew her grace to me, may she be entreated by you to allow me to love her son, whom I suffer now as my enemy.  Constrain the princes of your realm to me, my connection will be of benefit to them.  O[tto of Blois] and Herbert [of Troyes], very powerful counts will be with me in your council.  If it can be, put aside your [our] worries (1) so that we can enjoy mutual colloquies (talk together), or gather your ancient wisdom on all sides.  Prepare opposition to the Franks where they do not expect it, so their attack, gravely raging against you [us], may be dulled.  And meanwhile let us know what is to be done in writing and by very faithful messenger.


<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Aggravatus est dolor meus, o mi domina, o dulce matris nomen. Dum coniugem perdidi, spes in filio fuit. Is hostis factus est. Recesserunt ac me dulcissimi quondam amici mei. Ad ignominiam meam et totius generis mei nefandissima in Laudunensem confinxerunt episcopum. Persequuntur eum proprioque spoliare contendunt honore, ut inuratur mihi ignominia sempiterna, quae sit quasi iustissima causa amittendi honoris mei. Adesto pia mater filiae doloribus plenae. Gloriantur hostes mei non superesse mihi fratrem, propinquum, amicum, qui auxilium ferre possit. Intendat ad haec pia domina: Redeat vestra nurus in gratiam, sit mihi per vos exorabilis liceatque mihi filium suum diligere, quae meum patior ut inimicum. Adstringite mihi principes vestri regni, proderit eis mea coniunctio. O. et Heribertus comites potentissimi mecum in vestro consilio erunt. Si fieri potest, absolvite vos curis, ut mutuis fruamur colloquiis, sin, antiquam sapientiam vestram undique colligite. Francis, unde non sperant, contraria parate, ut in vos graviter saeviens eorum retundatur impetus. Et interim quid nobis sit faciendum, et scriptis significate et nuntio fidissimo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Emma, rejected by her son and her friends, begs her mother for the support of the empire.  She alludes to a scandal her enemies have made up about her.  In fact, her brother-in-law Charles of Lower Lorraine who wanted to displace her, accused her of adultery with Adalbero, bishop of Laon, an accusation that her son may have believed, perhaps even her mother.  Adultery was a common accusation by enemies or rivals against a queen who wielded political power.  The accusations of such an affair had begun during Lothar’s lifetime, but were disproved to the king’s satisfaction, and then brought up again after his death, see Ferdinand Lot, Les Derniers Carolingiens, 88, 193.  Adelaide does not seem to have helped Emma perhaps because she had her own difficulties with her daughter-in-law over the regency of Otto III, perhaps because Emma’s husband had been a rival for the empire, and had attacked her son’s lands.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)The reading in HGF and PL would give “free us from worries,” and “gravely raging against us” in the next sentence.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH BDKz 2 ep.97 p.126-27, dated October 986 to February 987; also in HGF9 ep.50 p. 288 and PL139 ep.97 c.226-27 same text, except MGH has <em>vos</em> for <em>nos</em> twice near the end and <em>retundatur</em> for <em>refundatur. </em></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>986-987