---
letter_id: "24905"
title: "A letter from Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne (1201, August 28.)"
ititle: "a letter from blanche of navarre, countess of champagne (1201, august 28.)"
ltr_date: "1201, August 28."
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-21"
url: "/letter/1204.html"
senders:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
receivers:
  - id: 21393
    name: Her provosts
    iname: her provosts
    type: people
    url: /people/21393.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The lady countess granted to all the provosts of her land holding provostures in this manner that all chattel will be the countess’s quit and whole.  From all gifts, however, and profits and forfeitures (penalties for crime) that  do not amount to more than 20 shillings, the lady countess will have four parts and the provosts the fifth.  The provosts however will not be able to take part of [eschivire] a forfeiture that is not more than 20 shillings except through the lady countess, unless from the errant man, if that forfeiture were not from theft or  robbery or murder.  A forfeiture that does not amount to more than 20 shillings the provosts will take a part and let them write, and two upright men of the town whom the lady countess appoints to do this, will report in writing what is to be accounted and by whom the deeds were done.  In the forfeiture that amounts to more than 20 shillings only, the provosts will not have 20 shillings but a fifth part and all the rest will be the countess’s.  They will accept no gift or service or reward except in foodstuffs, that yet …  The provosts will swear that they will keep all these in good faith and life and honor and all the rights of the lady countess and her heirs towards all who may live or die.  Let them know that, if they do not do this, they are in the wrath and ill will of the lady countess, like those who attack body and soul.
Enacted at Sezanne in the year of grace 1201, in the month of August on the Eve of the beheading of St. John the Baptist.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Domina comitissa concessit omnibus prcpositis terre sue preposituras in hunc modum habendas, quod omnes catalli erunt domine comitissc quite et integre. De omnibus autem donis et cxpletis et forisfactis que non montabunt plus quam XX solidos domina comitissa habebit quatuor partes et prepositi quintam. Ipsi autem prepositi non poterunt eschivire forisfactum quod non erit plus quam XX solidos, nisi per dominam comitissam, preterquam de homine errante, si tamen forisfactum illud non fuit de furto vel de raptu vel de multro. Forisfactum quod non montabit plus quam XX solidos eschivabunt prepositi, et scribant, et duo probi homines ville, quos domina comitissa ad hoc faciendum apponet, que tamen ad compotum reportabuntur scripta, et a quo vel quominus facta fuerunt. In forisfacto quod montabit plusquam XX solidos solummodo, non XX solidos habebunt prepositi sed quintam partem, et et residuum totum erit domine comitissc. Ipsi autem nullum donum vel servicium vel premium accipient preterquam in cibariis, que tamen ……	Juraverunt prepositi se hec omnia bona fide servaturos, et vitam et honorem et omnia jura domine comitisse et heredum suorum versus omnes qui possent vel vivere vel mori. Sciant, quod, si hec non fecerint, in ira et in voluntate mala domine comitisse sunt, tanquam illi qui inciderint de corpore et anima.
Actum apud Sezanniam anno gratie M°CC° primo mense augusti in vigilia decollationis Sancti Johannis Baptiste.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess, early in her regency, establishes the amounts her provosts can or cannot take from various kinds of income in their provostures.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Histoire des Ducs et des Comtes de Champagne</em>, H. d’Arbois de Jubainville (Paris: Aubrey.1860), v.2.xxvii.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1201, August 28.