---
letter_id: "24907"
title: "A letter from Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury (1156-57)"
ititle: "a letter from theobald, archbishop of canterbury (1156-57)"
ltr_date: "1156-57"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-13"
url: "/letter/1206.html"
senders:
  - id: 21592
    name: Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury
    iname: theobald, archbishop of canterbury
    type: people
    url: /people/21592.html
receivers:
  - id: 126
    name: Adelidis of Barking
    iname: adelidis of barking
    type: woman
    url: /woman/126.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We can no longer conceal the multiple and grave excesses of your negligence, as it is called for now, since your faults/crimes have come to the ears of the Roman pontiff and are provoking the indignation of the Roman church against our innocence.  We have indeed often warned you that you should abstain in every way from the well-known familiarity and cohabitation with your official Hugo, who is [living] in offence and scandal to all religion, since a foot or an eye should be, by the Lord’s command, cast off for such a thing.  Until now we have have borne [your] contempt for us and we grieve for the danger to your soul and reputation, and we shall certainly make you suffer without delay unless you amend your life and strive to reform the reputation of your house by swift correction.  For we have received apostolic rebukes and commands informing us that we will not be spared if we spare you any further in your errors.  Therefore we order you in virtue of obedience to remove said Hugo from the familiarity and intercourse of your house within seven days from the receipt of the present letters, and not permit him to carry on the administration of your church, lest, if you presume to oppose this, you feel yourself condemned by the authority of the lord pope.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Negligentiae tuae, ut interim sic dicatur, multiplices et graues excessus ulterius dissimulare non possumus, cum ad aures Romani pontificis delicta tua peruenerint, et aduersus innocentiam nostram sanctae Rom(anae) ecclesiae prouocent indignationem. Te quidem saepe monuimus ut a famosa familiaritate et cohabitatione Hug(onis) officialis tui, qui toti religioni est in offensionem et scandalum, modis omnibus abstineres, cum ex mandato Domini etiam pes uel oculus sit ob huiusmodi causam proiciendus[Matth.18:8-9]. Hucusque contemptum nostrum utcumque portauimus, adhuc de periculo animae tuae et famae dolemus, et te profecto sine mora dolere faciemus, nisi uitam tuam in melius commutaueris et domus tuae famam correctione celeri studueris reformare. Apostolicum namque mandatum et increpationes suscepimus, quae nobis indicunt non esse parcendum, si tibi ulterius pepercerimus in erroribus tuis. Proinde in uirtute obedientiae tibi praecipiendo mandamus, ut praefatum H(ugonem) a familiaritate et conuersatione domus tuae amoueas infra septimum diem a susceptione praesentium litterarum, et administrationes ecclesiae tuae gerere non permittas, ne, si aduersus haec uenire praesumpseris, te domini papae auctoritate sentias condempnatam.






<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The archbishop warns the abbess to sever her relations with her administrative official, Hugh, because of scandalous behavior.  Whether that behavior is sexual or political is not specified.  We know that the abbess was involved in a dispute over tithes with a priest, Roger of Ingatestone, which may have aroused the archbishop's anger, but we also know that Hugh remained in his position at the abbey after Adelidis' time.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>The Letters of John of Salisbury</em>, ed. W.J. Millor and H.E. Butler (London: Nelson, 1955), 1.111, ep.69.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1156-57