---
letter_id: "24930"
title: "A letter from Bertha of the Obertenghi (1029, July 9)"
ititle: "a letter from bertha of the obertenghi (1029, july 9)"
ltr_date: "1029, July 9"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-21"
url: "/letter/1229.html"
senders:
  - id: 129
    name: Bertha of the Obertenghi
    iname: bertha of the obertenghi
    type: woman
    url: /woman/129.html
  - id: 25327
    name: Ulric-Manfred, marques of Turin
    iname: ulric-manfred, marques of turin
    type: people
    url: /people/25327.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the father and son and holy spirit, we, Alric, by God’s grace bishop of the holy church of Asti, and Oldric, who is Manfred, with God assenting, marquis, brothers, sons of Manfred of good memory, likewise marquis, and Bertha, by the mercy of Christ, countess, spouses, daughter of the late Ottbert, also marquis, have professed to live under Salic law. Moreover with that same spouse of mine consenting to me and confirming below, we, present wish to say to those present how we desire to arrange through our testament certain property of ours by law. Whence concerning these same things we have established as our heir almighty God, to whom all things visible and invisible are subject, and for love and fear of him we wish to build a monastery where a society of monks may live perpetually and may pour forth prayers day and night for us, our fathers and mothers and our sons and daughters of those above spouses, and Ardoin, our grandfather and Adelbert, marquis, brother of the above Bertha, countess, and her sons, also Odo, Atto, Ugo, Guido, our brothers, also Ardoin and also Odo, our paternal uncle … and Ardoin, our cousin as well as for grandmothers, maternal uncles, paternal aunts, maternal aunts and for all other relatives of ours and for all faithful living and deceased, to our same creator so that he from his mercy might eliminate our crimes and cause us to persevere in good works and make us … sharers in life with his saints. We know truly that Christ and the church are one person (and) what are of the church are of Christ and whatever things are offered to the church are offered undoubtedly to Christ, and in holy scriptures is included according to the word of Christ: whoever has offered anything from his property to God or to his saints will receive a hundred-fold in this world (and) moreover what is better is he will possess eternal life. And therefore let it be known to all that we have and retain in our ownership a piece of land located within this city of Susa where a basilica is constructed in honor of our lord Jesus Christ and the holy trinity and the holy virgin Mary and St. Michael, archangel and the saints Peter and Paul, prince of the Apostles, and saints John the Baptist and John the Evangelist and St. Mauro, confessor of Christ and St. Iustin, martyr, where his holy body rests, and all saints, which (land) is by measure two acres, on which borders from the north and west the wall of that city. And we wish and determine that the congregation of monks remain in that church both now and perpetually, so that, providing divine offices according to the rule of St. Benedict, they might happily lead a blessed life. And for that society to be educated we have now already elected and consecrated as abbot a certain holy monk, devoted to God and by Christ’s mercy, worthy and educated in the same rule, by the name of Dominic, who following a life of the same teaching from infancy, appears to be well educated and cultivated. And through this our testament we judge and concede to the same monastery from our property for the use and expense of the monks of the same monastery with that piece of land that was specified above where the said church was dedicated. A third part of the same city of Susa and from its territory except from the castle that is located within the same city and a third part of the whole valley of Susa that is of our right both in mountains and in plains as the mountains that are called Ginevra and Cenis extend up to the territory and border of a villa that is called Vaga in the places and estates of Sesana, Oulx, Bardonesca, Salbertrand, Exilio, Chiomonte, Gialione, Meana, Mattie, Foresto, Bozoleto, St. George, Chianoco, Brusiolo, Borgone, Villar Focchiardo and in St. Agatha with houses, chapels, and all things belonging to the same places and territories and we also concede two whole courts and their appurtenances that are called Almese and Rubiana and we concede to the order and subjection of the same monastery and a monastery of our right located on the river Po in a place that … Pulcherada built in honor of the same St. Maurus with the court Pulcherada and its appurtenance and another court … with its appurtenances that is called Sambui and a third court and its appurtenances that is located on that part of the aforesaid river Po, that is called Matti with all things belonging to the same court, from the river that is called Stura up to the summit of the Alps; moreover another court and its appurtenances that is called Vigone and half of another court and its appurtenances that is called Volvera and likewise of our right, and also half of another court with both castle and chapel built on it and other things … belonging to it that is called Rivalta with its names Crispinate, Orbassano, Barone and with all of its other names and appurtenances except the place and territory that is called Pradella. All things that are named above we possess as included in plots and in vineyards with their grounds, arable lands, chapels, meadows, grasses, pastures, woods larger and smaller with their grounds, mills, fisheries, alps, banks, cliffs and marshes cultivated and uncultivated, divided and undivided … with accesses and borders, limits and uses of waters and courses of waters, and that property is by measure fifteen thousand acres. And if (anything) small or large will be found belonging to these parts, (more) than as the size is read above, let it be granted for the use and consumption of the aforesaid monk of the same monastery and thus we concede for the use and expense of the aforesaid monks ordained in that monastery a third part of the city of Susa and of the whole valley except all things that pertain to ecclesiastical right, namely tithes, first offerings, burials of parishioners and of all those proceeding along the road (in transit) unless they will have professed a monastic life, and whatever pertains to parochial right that are all in the right of the maternal and parish church of St. Mary, that was made and established in antiquity by our ancestors, relatives and associates within the city of Susa near the wall and the monastery, we grant for its use and expense, from our properties completely and … so that without any parish and any parochial right we wish and establish that it exist and remain eternally. And moreover, we command and order firmly that in no way should that monastery remain under the rule of any bishop or any monastery or any person or through gift of an emperor or king or any person. But let it always be in the power of almighty God whom we make heir concerning the same and of the said holy Trinity and of the holy virgin Mary and of St. Michael, archangel and of the saints Peter and Paul, prince of the apostles, and saints John the Baptist and also John the Evangelist and St. Mauro, confessor of Christ and also St. Iustin, martyr of Christ, and of all saints serving them; let it be commanded as will be declared here below, that is that as long as all or one of us will be alive in this world, let it be under our rule following God and his aforesaid saints. But after the death of all of us, if a son from our marriage, of the spouses above, will be widowed … to the first-born that ordination should be given freely, that is he should be established as abbot. And after the first to the second and after the second to the third, and thus one after the other should receive that ordination. But if at that time there will be no sons and grandsons and great-grandsons who are likewise widowed, from our marriage, of the spouses as above, thus we have the rule concerning sons such that we command that the same one up to the fifth degree of kinship, always whoever will be older in birth should have ….. the ordination. But if there will be no sons or grandsons or great-grandchildren of the same sex then we determine that (the ordination) should come or exist for our daughters, of the above spouses, and their children, giving the ordination freely to the males … to all equally but always whoever will be older in birth should have the ordination. But after there will be no sons or daughters or their children of those same spouses then we determine and through this our testament confirm that an abbot of the same monastery will not exist and it will be necessary to establish another such that through the election of the monks of the same monastery the abbot should be chosen from the same society; he should not be chosen or come from a different place. But he who will be chosen by the greater and better part of those monks should become abbot, and thus let it be established by us that one of the monks of the same monastery, through consensus of the greater and better part of the other monks of the same monastery, should place the staff over the same principal altar of that church ….he should receive that and, according to the privilege of the highest Pontiff which is the Roman pope who has thus willed and commanded according to our will and ordination, let him proceed to be consecrated by whichever bishop he wishes. And let it be understood thus concerning all the abbots who from now into the future will be ordained in the same monastery. And thus as was said above, by the small knife, knotted straw, glove and by piece of earth and by branch of tree1 we make legitimate transfer and investiture to the same God and to his aforesaid saints and we thereby, as is read above and affirmed below, have driven ourselves out, guaranteed, making it over to the monks ordained of the same monastery, for their use and expense (to do) whatever they will, for reward of our soul, and our fathers and mothers, our sons and daughters of the spouses above, and of Ardoin, our grandfather, and Adelbert, marquis, brother of the above Bertha, countess, and his sons and also Odo, Atto, Ugo, and Guido, our brothers, also Ardoin and that Odo our paternal uncle or that Ardoin our cousin, as for the grandmothers, maternal great-uncles and aunts, maternal aunts and all our other relatives of either sex or for all the faithful dead as said above, mercy. But if it will happen that any person great or small, motivated by detestable greed, which we do not wish or desire and also do not hope for, will presume to violate this our will and ordination, as was said above, to move elsewhere or change all the aforesaid properties or any part as were commanded by us with the Lord Jesus Christ as our author, for his honor and for consolation of his poor, … or with any seizure to violate our will and said ordination, let one or two of them from the monks united of the same monastery be chosen continually who will report for the others on behalf of God and holy Mary and St. Michael the archangel and the saints Peter and Paul, prince of the apostles, and saints John the Baptist and also John the Evangelist and saints Mauro and Iustin, on the person who perpetrated this so that he may renounce and agree to fulfill that ordination as named above. But if after a first and second and third warning he will refuse to assent and will not put aside the hope of incorrigible arrogance, let it be published about him as it is known, that he has persecuted a poor and indigent man … and he has not remembered to have mercy and remorse of heart and he has delighted in malediction and it will come to him, and he has refused benediction and it will be withdrawn from him. And the church is accustomed to declare everything that … in the person of Judas, betrayer of Christ and of the wicked …. in individual churches let it be declared about him because God said as long as you did it to one of my least, you did it to me, and as long as you did not do it to these, you did not do it to me. And therefore it is not doubted that what is proved to be in the head is understood to be in the members, and let his days become few, and let another receive his honor. And moreover let that monastery with all its appurtenance come into the power of our closest relatives who will appear at that time, not for ownership but for governing and defense. And let it remain in their power as long as as that person who committed this, willingly or unwillingly refuses to fulfill our ordination as said above. And for fulfilling all these things as read above we have established in this testament, you, God, almighty creator of all, as our heir. But let the said lord abbot be a general representative of faith for us in this testament. But we give and delegate to you, most holy church those things that were said above for the use and expense of your monks serving… to them in the way that was declared above. And for those things to come that we cannot see we make contract insofar as we can. But if, which we do not believe will occur, we, God forbid, or any of our heirs or representatives of heirs or any person opposed till attempt at any time to go against this testament or will seek to infringe it through any contrivance, then let us bring against that party against whom we shall have brought suit, great penalty, that is a hundred ounces of pure gold, two-hundred pounds of silver. Moreover, those properties (will be restored) twofold to the party of the same monastery as they will be improved or valued at that time by judgment in similar places, and we will renew what we cannot vindicate. But let this present testament remain firm and stable for long duration and let it persist unshaken with stipulation supported. And therefore I, who as Salic bishop by the honor of priesthood, now am understood to live (under) Roman law although from birth I am Salic, as above. May I not be permitted at any time to refuse what I willed but I promise to preserve inviolably what was once drawn up and done by me, with stipulation supported, and we have embossed the parchment with ink from the earth; we have delivered it to Herenzo, notary and judge of the holy palace to be written and we requested that it be done (and) we offered it to be strengthened by witnesses confirming below. Whence two testaments were written with one meaning. In the third year of the empire of lord Conrad, emperor with God propitious, ninth day of the month of July, twelfth indiction. Enacted happily in the city of Turin. + Alric, by God’s grace Bishop, signed below on this testament made by him. + This is the sign of lord Manfred, marquis, who requested that this testament be made for his soul and those of his relatives and for all the faithful deceased and thenceforth established God almighty as heir, as above. Sign + by of the hand of the said Bertha, countess, who with her same husband and with him consenting, requested that this testament be made, as above. Sign ++ by the hands of John and Oldric, both witnesses living under Roman law. Sign ++ by the hands of Witbert, count and Hudo, witnesses living under Salic law. Sign +++ by the hands of Belezo and Albert and Ato, witnesses. I, as above, Erenzo (sic), notary and judge of the holy palace, writer, completed and gave this testament, subsequently delivered.2</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine patris et filii et spiritus sancti Nos Alricus gratia dei sancte astensis Ecclesie Episcopus et Odelricus qui et Maginfredus annuente deo marchio iermanis filii bone memorie itemque Maginfredi similiter marchionis et Berta Xpi misericordia cometissa iugales filia quondam Autberti itemque marchionis qui professi sumus lege uiuere salica. Ipso namque iugale meo mihi consentiente et subter confirmante presentibus presentes dicere uolumus quomodo per testamentum nostrum iure quasdam res nostras ordinare desideramus. Vnde omnipotentem Deum cui omnia uisibilia et inuisibilia sunt subiecta de hisdem rebus heredem nostrum constituimus et pro eius amore atque timore monasteriuin construere uolumus ubi congregatio monachorum perpetualiter existat que die noctuque tam pro nobis genitoribus seu genetricibus atque filiis filiabusque nostris quorum supra iugalium siue Ardoini auii nostri atque Adelberti marchionis cuius supra Berte cometisse fratris filiorumque sui. Nec non Oddonis Attonis Vgonis Vuidonis fratrum nostrorum item Ardoini et item Oddonis patruum nostrorum seu…..Ardoini nostri consobrini quam pro auiabus auunculis amitis materteris et pro omnibus ceteris propinquioribus nostris siue pro omnibus fidelibus uiuis atque defunctis effundant preces ad eundem creatorem nostrum ut ipse propter suam clementiam nostra deleat scelera et in bonis operibus nos perseuerare faciat et ad uitam ….. cum sanctis suis participes nos faciat.  Scimus ueraciter Xpum et ecclesiam unam esse personam que ecclesie sunt Xpi sunt quecumque ecclesie offeruntur procul dubio Xpo offeruntur et in sanctis scripturis insertum est iuxta auctoris uocem. Quisquis ad Deum uel in Sanctis suis ex suis aliquid contulerit rebus in hoc seculo centuplum accipiet insuper quod melius est uitam possidebit eternam.
Et ideo omnibus notum sit quia habemus et detinemus ad nostram proprietatem peciam unam de terra intra hanc secusiensem ciuitatem positam ubi basilica in honore domini nostri Ihu Xpi et sancte Trinitatis sancteque Marie Virginis siue sancti Michaelis arcangeli seu sanctorum Petri et Pauli Apostolorum Principis etiam sanctorum Iohannis Baptiste et Iohannis Euangeliste atque sancti Mauri confessoris Xpi nec non sancti Iusti martiris ubi eius sanctum quiescit corpus atque omnium sanctorum est constructa que est per mensuram iustam iugera duo cui coeret ab aquilone et occidente murus ipsius civitatis  Et in ea basilica uolumus et iudicamus ut nunc et in perpetuum permaneat congregatio monachorum qui secundum regulam sancti Benedicti diuina subministrantes officia uitam feliciter ducant beatam . et ad ipsam congregationem doctrinandum iam electum et sacratum habemus ad abbatem quendam monachum et Deo deuotum Xpi misericordia dignum et eiusdem regule doctum nomine Dominicum qui ab infantia eiusdem doctrine uitam consequens bene uidetur esse doctus atque nutritus . Et per hoc nostrum testamentum iudicamus atque concedimus eidem monasterio de nostra proprietate ad husum et sumptum monachorum eiusdem monasterii cum ipsa pecia de terra quae superius denominata est ubi iam dicta basilica est dedicata. Terciam partem eiusdem ciuitatis Secusie siue de eius territorio excepto de castro quod infra eandem ciuitatem est positum seu terciam partem de tota ualle Secusie que iuris est nostri tam in montibus quam in planiciebus sicut detinent montes qui uocati sunt Geneui et Cinisi usque in territorium et finem de uilla que uocatur Vaga in locis et fundis Sesana Vlci Bardonesca Salibertani Exilio Capud montis . Galionis Mediane Matingo Foresto Bozoleto sancto Georgio Canusso Brusiolo Burbono Villare Fulchardi et in sancta Agatha cum casis capellis uniuersisque rebus eisdem locis et territoriis pertinentibus seu etiam concedimus cortes duas integras siue eorum pertinentias que Almesi et Robiana sunt uocata seu concedimus in ordinatione et subiectione eiusdem monasterii itemque monasterium iuris nostri positum super fluuio Padi in loco qui	….. ur Pulkierada in honore eiusdem sancti Mauri constructum cum ipsa corte Pulkierada et eius pertinentia siue aliam cortem ….. ta ipsam cum eius pertinentia que Sambuzeti est uocata atque terciam cortem siue eius pertinencia que de ista parte prefati fluuii Padi est posita que Matingo est nuncupata cum omnibus rebus eiusdem cortis pertinentibus de fluuio qui uocatur Stura usque in cacumine Alpium. Insuper eciam cortem aliam et eius pertinencia que Vicogodone est nuncupata. atque medietatem de corte altera et de eius pertinentiis que Volueria est apellata similique iuris nostri Eciam et medietatem de alia corte tam de castro et capella in ea constructis quam de ceteris ….. ei pertinentibus que Ripa alta est nominata cum uocabulis suis Crispiniate. Orbaciano. Barono siue cum ceteris omnibus suis uocabulis et pertinentiis excepto loco et territorio quod Pradella est nominata. Omnia que superius habemus denominata sicut continetur in sediminibus et in uineis cum areis suarum terris arabilibus capellis pratis ierbis pascuis siluis maioribus ac minoribus cum areis suarum molendinis piscationibus alpibus ripis rupinis ac paludibus cultis et incultis diuisis et indiuisis . . . cum accessionibus seu finibus terminibus et usibus aquarum aquarumque decursibus. et est ipsa res per mensuram iustam iugera quindecim milia. et sic parum uel maximum hisdem partibus pertinentibus inuentum fuerit quam ut supra mensura legitur in husum et sumptum prefati monachi eiusdem monasterii ordinati sit concessum et sic concedimus in husum et sumptum prefatis monachis eiusdem monasterii terciam partem Secusie ciuitatis et tocius uallis Exceptis omnibus que pertinent ad ecclesiastica iura. scilicet decimas primicias offersiones sepulturas parrochianorum et omnium per stratam gradientium nisi professi fuerint monachalem uitam. et quicquid pertinet ad ius parrochiale que omnia sunt de iure matricis et parrochialis ecclesie sancte Marie que in antiquissimum ab antecessoribus parentibus et contribulibus nostris est facta et fundata infra ciuitatem Segusie iuxta murum et monasterium prope est ad cuius husum et sumptum de nostris proprietatibus tot et tanta concedimus atque …..mur ut sine omni parrochia et absque omni parrochiali iure uolumus illud et statuimus perhempniter esse et permanere. Et insuper firmiter iubemus et ordinamus ut nullomodo maneat ipsum monasterium in regimine ullius Episcopi uel alius monasterii nec ullarum personarum aut per donum imperatoris uel regis neque ullius persone. Set semper sit in Dei omnipotentis potestatem quem de eodem facimus heredem et iam dicte sancte Trinitatis sancteque Virginis Marie sanctique Michaelis Archangeli seu sanctorum Petri et Pauli Apostolorum Principis atque sanctorum Iohannis Baptiste et item Iohannis Euangeliste et sancti Mauri confessoris Xpi nec non et sancti Iusti martyris Xpi siue omnium sanctorum seruientibus eis sit ordinatum sicut hic subter fuerit declaratum idest ut quandiu omnes uel unius ex nobis in hoc seculo fuerit uita sit in nostra sequente Deo et prefatis sanctis eius . regimina. Post uero nostrorum omnium decessum si filius masculinus ex nostro coniugio quarum supra iugales fuerit relictus sit ... . ante nato gratis dandum ipsum ordinamentum hoc est Abbatem constituendum. Et post priorem in secundo et post secundum in tercio. et sic unus post alteram recipiat ipsum ordinamentum Si uero defuerint tunc temporis filii masculini et nepotes uel pronepotes similiter masculini relicti fuerint ex nostro quorum supra iugalium coniugio sicut de filiis statutum habemus ita et isdem usque in quintum geniculum ordinamus ut semper qui maior fuerit ex natione habeat ….. ordinationem.  Quod si defuerint filii masculini siue nepotes et pronepotes eiusdem sexus tunc iudicamus ut ueniat et sit in filiarum nostrarum eoram supra iugalium et in liberos masculini eorum potestati gratis dando …..	ordinamen … . ad omnes equaliter sed semper qui uel que fuerit maior ex natione habeat ipsam ordinationem.  Postquam autem filii et filie seu liberi eorumdem iugatum defuerint tunc iudicamus et per hoc nostrum testamentum confirmamus ut abbas eiusdem monasterii abierit et alium constituendi necessitas fuerit ut per electionem monachorum eiusdem monasterii fiat electus abbas de eadem congregatione non aliunde uenturus nec electus sit. sed ille quem a maiore et meliore parte eorum monachorum fuerit electus abbas fiat, et ita constitutum a nobis sit ut unus ex monachis eiusdem monasterii per consensum maioris partis et melioris ceterorum monachorum eiusdem monasterii ponat baculum super idem altare ipsius Basilice principale ……us est illud accipiat et secundum priuilegium summi Pontificis qui est Papa Romanus qui sic uoluit et iussit iuxta uoluntatem et ordinationem nostram uadat se consecrari a quocumque uoluerit Episcopo Et sic de omnibus abbatibus qui in eodem monasterio ab hinc in antea fuerint ordinati ita intelligendum est. Et ita ut supra dictum est per cultellum festucam latum uuantonem et per uuasonem terre atque per ramum arboris ad eundem Deum et ad prefatos sanctos eius legitimam facimus traditionem et inuestituram et nos exinde foris sic supra legitur et subter affirmatur expulimus uuarpiuimus facientes monachi eiusdem monasterii ordinati ad suorum husum et sumptum quicquid uoluerint tam pro anime nostre nostrorumque genitoribus et genitricibus flliis filiabusque nostris quorum supra iugalium siue Ardoini auii nostri atque Adelberti marchionis cuius supra Berte cometisse fratris filiorumque sui nec non Oddonis Attonis Vgonis Vuidonis  fratrum nostrorum item Ardoini et item Oddonis patruis nostris seu item Ardoini nostri consobrini quam pro auiabus auunculis amitis materteris et pro omnibus ceteris propinquioribus nostris utriusque sexus siue pro omnibus fidelibus defunctis ut supra dictum est mercede .   Quod si contigerit ut quelibet persona magna paruaque hanc nostram uoluntatem et ordinationem que superius dicta est quod non obtamus nec cupimus sed neque speramus exsecrabili cupiditate ductus res prefatas totas uel quancumque partem sicut a nobis auctore Domino nostro Ihu Xpo ad illius honorem et eius pauperum consolationem ordinate sunt aliorsum distrahere im . . . are commutare seu quolibet obtentu uoluntatem et iam dictam nostram ordinationem uiolare presumpserit continuo coadunatis monachis eiusdem monasterii eligantur ex se ipsis unus uel duo qui nuntient pro aliis ex Dei parte et sancte Marie seu sancti Michaelis arcangeli sanctorumque Petri et Pauli Principis apostolorum et sanctorum Iohannis Baptiste et item Iohannis Euangeliste atque sanctorum Mauri et Iusti illi persone qui hoc perpetrauerit ut dimittat concedatque implere ipsam ordinationem que superius est nominata. Si uero post primam et secundam seu tertiam amonitionem assentire noluerit et incorrigibilis contumatie spem non deposuerit fiat de eo sicut noscitur decantatum. quia persecutus est hominem inopem et mendicum et compunctum corde……	et non est recordatus facere misericordiam. et dilexit maledictionem et ueniet ei. et noluit benedictionem et elongabitur ab eo. totumque ei quod in persona Iude traditoris Xpi et malignorum Ecclesia decantare solet	 ….. singulas ei decantetur Ecclesias quia Deus dixit . Quamdiu fecistis uni ex minimis meis mihi fecistis et quamdiu his non fecistis nec michi fecistis . Et ideo quod probatur in capite ex membris intelligendum esse non dubitatur. et fiant dies eius pauci. et honorem eius accipiat alter. Et insuper ueniat ipsum monasterium cum omni sua pertinentia in potestate de propinquioribus parentibus nostris qui tunc temporis apparuerint non in proprietate sed in gubernatione et defensione. et tamdiu in eorum permaneat potestate quamdiu illa persona qui hoc perpetrauerit uolente nolenteque nostram ordinationem que supradicta est implere dimittat.  Et de his omnibus que superius legitur implendi te Deus omnipotens Creator omnium constituimus in hoc testamento heredem esse nostrum. Iam dictus uero Dominicus Abbas sit nobis in hoc testamento fidei generale commissarium. Tibi uero sanctissima Ecclesia eas res que supradicte sunt ad husum et sumptum tuorum monachorum seruientium . . . eis in eo modo ut supra declaratum est damus atque delegamus . Et pro eo quod ea que uentura sunt uidere nequimus in quantum possumus conligationem facimus. Si quis uero quod futurum esse non credimus si nos quod absit aut ullus de heredibus nostris ac proheredibus seu quislibet opposita persona contra hoc testamentum ire quandoque temptauerimus. aut illud per quodcumque ingenium infringere quesierimus tunc inferamus ad illam partem contra quem exinde litem intulerimus multa que est pena auro obtimo uncias centum argenti ponderas ducenti. Insuper res ipsas in duplum parti eiusdem monasterii sicut pro tempore fuerint meliorate aut ualuerint sub estimatione in consimilibus locis. et quod repecierimus uendicare non ualeamus. sed presens hoc testamentum diuturnis temporibus firmum stabilitumque permaneat atque persistat inconuulsum cum stipulatione subnixa. Et ideo quod ego qui Salico Episcopo honore sacerdocii habeo et legem Romanam nunc uiuere uideor quamuis ex natione ut supra Salichus sum .  Nec michi liceat ullo tempore nolle quod uolui sed quod a me semel factum uel conscriptum est inuiolabiliter conseruare promitto cum stipulatione subnixa et bergamena cum tramentario de terra eleuauimus Herenzoni notario et Iudici Sacri Palacii ad scribendum tradidimus et id fieri rogauimus In qua subter confirmanter testibus obtulimus roborandum. Vnde duo testamenta uno tenore scripta sunt. Anno imperii Domini Chunradi Imperatori Deo propicio tercio. nono die mensis iulii Indictione duodecima. 
Actum Taurinensem ciuitatem feliciter.
+ Alricus gratia Dei Episcopus in hoc testamento a se facto subscripsit.
+  Hoc est signum Domini Maginfredi marchionis qui hoc testamentum pro anima sua suorumque parentum atque pro omnibus fidelibus defunctis fieri rogauit et inde Deum omnipotentem heredem instituit ut supra.
Signum + manu iam dicte Berte cometisse que cum eundem uirum suum cumque consentiente hoc testamentum fieri rogauit ut supra.  
Signum ++ manibus Iohanni et Odelrici ambo lege uiuentes romana testes.
Signum ++ manibus Vuitberti comiti et Hudoni lege uiuentes salica testes.
Signum +++ manibus Belezoni et Alberti seu Atoni testes.
Ego qui supra Erenzo notarius et iudex sacri Palacii scriptor hoc testamentum post traditum compleui et dedi.

<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Countess Bertha joins her husband Oldric Manfred, and his brother, Alric, bishop of Asti, in the endowment of the monastery of S. Giusto of Susa.  There are various lacunae in the original text.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1. These are traditional symbolic objects handed over at the transfer of property.  I am grateful to Adam Kosto for this explanation.
2. This translation was provided by Ashleigh Imus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Manuscript source:</h2>Da copia sincrona cha si conserva nell’ Archivio della R. Camera de' Coriti. ( L. C.)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Historiae Patriae Monumenta</em>, (Augustae Taurinorum ex Officina Regia: 1853), Chartarum T.I, c.479-84, doc.277.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1029, July 9