---
letter_id: "24941"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (594, June)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (594, june)"
ltr_date: "594, June"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-26"
url: "/letter/1240.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 134
    name: Constantina
    iname: constantina
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The serenity of your piety, remarkable for love of holiness and zeal for devotion, enjoins me by your commands to send, for the church constructed in the palace in honor of the apostle St. Paul, the head of the same saint or another part of his body.  And while I might wish that these things be commanded of me, by which, lending very easy obedience to you, I could elicit further grace toward me, greater sadness has constrained me because I neither dare nor am able to carry out what you ask.  For the bodies of the apostles Saints Peter and Paul flash forth in their churches with such awesome miracles and terrifying signs that one cannot even go in there to pray without great fear.  Indeed, when my predecessor of blessed memory wanted to change the silver that was above the apostle St. Peter’s most sacred body, silver that was nonetheless nearly fifteen feet away, a sign of no small terror appeared to him.  But I also similarly wanted to improve something near the very sacred body of the apostle St. Paul, and because it was necessary to dig rather deeply near the grave, the provost of that place found some bones that were certainly not part of the same grave.  Because he dared to pick up and transfer them to another spot, he was struck with sudden death by certain grim signs that appeared.
	In addition, my predecessor of holy memory, likewise wanting to improve certain things near the body of the martyr St. Laurence, since the location of the venerable body was unknown, in seeking it out excavated, and unbeknownst to them his grave was suddenly opened, and those monks and sacristans who were present and working, because they saw the body of the same martyr which they certainly had not dared to touch, were all dead within ten days, so that no one who had seen his saintly injured body was able to survive.
	Moreover, (our) most serene lady should know that it is not the custom for Romans, when they give the relics of saints, that anyone dares to touch the body.  But a piece of cloth is simply put in a small box and placed near the saints’ most sacred bodies.  When taken out, it is hidden away with due reverence in the church to be dedicated, and through this so many miraculous powers occur there as if their bodies were specifically brought there.  And so it happened in the time of Pope Leo of blessed memory, as related by the forefathers, that when certain Greeks had doubts about such relics, the said pontiff cut this cloth with scissors that he had brought forth, and from that cut blood flowed out.  So, among the Romans and in the lands of all the west it is utterly intolerable and sacrilegious if anyone by chance wanted to touch the bodies of saints.  If they dared to do so, it is certain that in no way would this boldness remain unpunished.  Because of this, we are very surprised and hardly believe the custom of the Greeks who claim that they raise the bones of saints.  For certain Greek monks who came here two years ago unearthed in the silence of night the bodies of the dead lying in a field near the church of St. Paul, and hid away their bones, keeping them for themselves when they left.  When they were detained and questioned carefully about why they were doing this, they admitted they would bring the bones to Greek lands as if they were the relics of saints.  From their example, as was said, greater doubt arose in us about whether it is true that they actually remove the bones of saints.
	What should I say about the bodies of the blessed apostles, since it is well known that in the time when they were martyred some faithful ones came from the east who were requesting their bodies as their citizens?  When the bodies were brought to the second mile of the city, they were gathered in the place called the Catacombs.  But when their whole crowd assembling tried to take them from there, the force of thunder and lightning terrified and dispersed them with fear beyond measure so that they did not dare try such things again.  Then, going out, the Romans who deserved this, by the Lord’s piety, took their bodies and put them in the places where they are now stored.
	Who, therefore, most serene lady, can be so very presumptuous that knowing these things, he would dare – I don’t say to touch – but even in some way to look at their bodies?  Consequently, that you have commanded to me such things that in no way I can obey, insofar as I ascertain, is not your idea.  But certain men wanted to incite your piety against me so that they might deny me the favor of your will, God forbid, and for that reason they have looked for a pretext by which you would find me practically disobedient.  But I trust in the almighty Lord that in no way is he snatched away from your most benign will and you will always have, not in their physical presence but in their protection, the power of the holy apostles whom you love with your entire heart and mind.
	Further, the cloth that you also ordered to be sent is with his body.  Accordingly it cannot be touched, just as his body cannot be approached.  But because such devout desire of (our) most serene lady must not go unrewarded, we will rush to send to you some part of the chains that the holy apostle Paul himself wore on his neck and hands, from which many miracles are described among the people, if only I am able to remove it by filing it off.  For since many come frequently and seek benediction from those same chains in order to receive some small portion of the filings, a priest assists with the file, and for some seekers something is shaken off quickly from the chains so that there is no delay.  But for certain ones requesting, the file is passed over the chains at length and although something comes off, nothing is obtained.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Serenitas vestrae pietatis religionis studio et sanctitatis amore conspicua propter eam, quae in honorem sancti Pauli apostoli in palatio aedificatur, ecclesiam caput eiusdem sancti Pauli, aut aliud quid de corpore ipsius, suis ad se iussionibus a me praecepit, debere transmitti. Et dum ilIa mihi desiderarem imperari, de quibus facillimam oboedientiam exhibens vestram erga me amplius potuissem gratiam provocare, maior me maestitia tenuit, quod illa praecipitis, quae facere nec possum nec audeo. Nam corpora sanctorum Petri et Pauli apostolorum tantis in ecclesiis suis coruscant miraculis atque terroribus, ut neque ad orandum sine magno illic timore possit accedi. Denique dum beatae recordationis decessor meus, quia argentum quod supra sacratissimum corpus sancti Petri apostoli erat, longe tamen ab eodem corpore fere quindecim pedibus mutare voluit, signum ei non parvi terroris apparuit. Sed et ego aliquid similiter ad sacratissimum corpus sancti Pauli apostoli meliorare volui, et quia necesse erat, ut iuxta sepulchrum eiusmodi effodiri altius debuisset, praepositus loci ipsius ossa aliqua non quidem eidem sepulchro coniuncta repperit. Quae quoniam levare praesumpsit atque in alio loco transponere, apparentibus quibusdam tristibus signis subita morte defunctus est.
Praeter haec autem sanctae memoriae decessor meus itidem ad corpus sancti Laurentii martiris quaedam meliorare desiderans, dum nescitur ubi corpus esset venerabile collocatum, effoditur exquirendo et subito sepulchrum ipsius ignoranter apertum est, et hi qui praesentes erant atque laborabant monachi et mansionarii, quia corpus eiusdem martiris viderunt, quod quidem minime tangere praesumpserunt, omnes intra decem dies defuncti sunt, ita ut nullus vitae superesse potuisset, qui sanctum inustum corpus illius viderat.
Cognoscat autem tranquillissima domina, quia Romanis consuetudo non est quando sanctorum reliquias dant, ut quicquam tangere praesumant de corpore. Sed tantummodo in buxide brandeum mittitur, atque ad sacratissima corpora sanctorum ponitur. Quod levatum, in ecclesia quae est dedicanda debita cum veneratione reconditur, et tantae per hoc ibidem virtutes fiunt, ac si illic specialiter eorum corpora deferantur. Unde contigit, ut beatae recordationis Leonis papae tempore, sicut a maioribua traditur, dum quidam Greci de talibus reliquiis dubitarent, praedictus pontifex hoc ipsum brandeum allatis forficibus incidit, et ex ipsa incisione sanguis effluxit. In Romanis namque vel totius Occidentis partibus omnino intolerabile est atque sacrilegum, si sanctorum corpora tangere quisquam fortasse voluerit. Quod si praesumpserit, certum est, quia haec temeritas inpunita nullo modo remanebit. Pro qua re de Grecorum consuetudine, qui ossa levare sanctorum se asserunt, vehementer miramur, et vix credimus. Nam quidam Greci monachi hic ante biennium venientes, nocturno silentio iuxta ecclesiam sancti Pauli corpora mortuorum in campo iacentia effodiebant, atque eorum ossa recondebant, servantes sibi dum recederent. Qui cum tenti et cur hoc facerent diligenter fuissent discussi, confessi sunt, quod illa ossa ad Grecias essent tamquam sanctorum reliquias portaturi. Ex quorum exemplo, sicut praedictum est, maior nobis dubietas nata est, utrum verum sit quod levari veraciter ossa sanctorum dicuntur.
De corporibus vero beatorum apostolorum quid ego dicturus sum, dum constet, quia eo tempore quo passi sunt ex Oriente fideles venerunt, qui eorum corpora sicut civium suorum repeterent? Quae ducta usque ad secundum urbis milliarium, in loco, qui dicitur Catacumbas, conlocata sunt. Sed dum ea exinde levare omnis eorum multitudo conveniens niteretur, ita eos vis tonitrui atque fulguris nimio metu terruit ac dispersit, ut talia denuo nullatenus temptare praesumerent. Tunc autem exeuntes Romani eorum corpora, qui hoc ex Domini  pietate meruerunt, levaverunt, et in locis quibus nunc sunt condita posuerunt.
Quis ergo, serenissima domina, tam temerarius possit existere, ut haec sciens eorum corpora non dico tangere, sed vel aliquatenus praesumat inspicere? Dum igitur talia mihi a vobis praecepta sunt, de quibus parere nullatenus potuissem, quantum invenio, non vestrum est. Sed quidam homines contra me pietatem vestram excitare voluerunt, ut mihi quod absit voluntatis vestrae gratiam subtraherent, et propterea quaesiverunt capitulum, de quo vobis quasi inoboediens invenirer. Sed in omnipotente Domino confido, quia nullo modo benignissimae voluntati subripitur, et sanctorum apostolorum virtutem, quos toto corde et mente diligitis, non ex corporali praesentia, sed ex protectione semper habebitis.
Sudarium vero, quod similiter transmitti iussistis, cum corpore eius est. Quod ita tangi non potest, sicut nec ad corpus illius accedi. Sed quia serenissimae dominae tam religiosum desiderium esse vacuum non debet, de catenis, quas ipse sanctus Paulus apostolus in collo et in manibus gestavit, ex quibus multa miracula in populo demonstrantur, partem vobis aliquam transmittere festinabo, si tamen hanc tollere limando praevaluero. Quia dum frequenter ex catenis eisdem multi veniunt et benedictionem petunt, ut parum quid ex limatura accipiant assistit sacerdos cum lima, et aliquibus petentibus ita concite aliquid de catenis ipsis excutitur, ut mora nulla sit. Quibusdam vero petentibus diu per catenas ipsas lima ducitur, et tamen ut aliquid exinde exeat, non obtinetur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Gregory refuses the empress’ request for relics of St. Paul to be placed in the new church of St. Paul in Constantinople, but sends her a part of his  chains and threatening stories of miracles related to moving the bodies of saints.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Asleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii Papae Registrum Epistolarum</em>, ed. P. Ewald and L. M. Hartman, MGH, (Berlin: Weidmann 1887-91, repr. Munich, 1978), ep.4.30.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>594, June