---
letter_id: "24945"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (600, September)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (600, september)"
ltr_date: "600, September"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-13"
url: "/letter/1244.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21362.html
receivers:
  - id: 135
    name: Adeodata
    iname: adeodata
    type: woman
    url: /woman/135.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory to the illustrious woman Adeodata
Although we caused delay in sending the relics that your glory seeks, we did not delay willingly but an event of a preceding matter caused us to hesitate.  Yet almighty God, seeing the devotion of your heart, by advising through the signs of miracles did not allow you to be cheated of your purpose.  But for that reason he wanted your desire to be deferred with brief delay so that with instructive miracles love might grow in you for veneration of the saints, and a greater celebration of joys would occur.  Therefore since in your desire for the requested object your wishes were fulfilled, we urge you to observe carefully the commands of him whose preachers you cherish, and just as with religious devotion you establish earthly places in honor of the saints, so also hasten to obtain for yourself a dwelling with them in heaven, so that you will deserve to have them here as supporters in all things and in the future life as companions.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>GREGORIUS ADEODATAE INLUSTRI FEMINAE.
Ut moram in dandis reliquiis, quas gloria vestra petit, faceremus, non voluntate distulimus, sed praecedentis rei nos casus fecit ambigere. Deus autem omnipotens cordis vestri devotionem intuens miraculorum signis ammonentibus a vestra vos intentione fraudari non pertulit. Sed ideo desiderium vestrum modica voluit dilatione differri, ut docentibus miraculis et amor vobis cresceret in veneratione sanctorum et maior fieret exultatio gaudiorum. Quia ergo in affectu postulatae rei gloriae vestrae vota completa sunt, hortamur, ut cuius praedicatores colitis eius sollicite mandata servetis et, sicut religiosa devotione terrena sanctorum honoribus loca construitis, sic quoque cum eis mansionem vobis procurare in caelestibus festinetis, quatenus et hic illos in omnibus adiutores et in futura mereamini habere vita consortes.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope sends Adeodata relics she had requested a while ago, perhaps for the monastery she founded, saying miracles have since strengthened her request, and encouraging her in her devotion to the saints.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii I Papae Registum Epistolarum,</em> ed. Paulus Ewald and Ludovicus Hartmann (Berlin: Weidmann, 1887-91, repr. 1978), 11.5.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>600, September