---
letter_id: "24946"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (601, February)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (601, february)"
ltr_date: "601, February"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-20"
url: "/letter/1245.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 136
    name: Barbara and Antonina
    iname: barbara and antonina
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>After I received your glory’s letters, which spoke with tears rather than words, grief over the illness of our most beloved son afflicts us no less than it does you over your father.  For we cannot call foreign sadness that indeed by the law of charity becomes our own.  But since in no desperate situation should we lose faith in the mercy of our redeemer, lift your minds to the consolation of your father, place your hope in the hand of almighty God; and we trust in his protection that he guard you from all adversity and comfort your distress and allow you to be disposed favorably according to paternal wishes.  But if the debt of human fate is fulfilled, let no desperation constrain you and no one’s words strike terror into you.  For after God, who is the ruler and protector of orphans, so we will be attentive of your sweetest glory, and with the Lord helping we will hasten to provide for your interest as we can so that no extortion of unjust men distresses you, and we will repay to you in all things the debt that we incurred from the goodness of your parents.  And so let heavenly grace nourish you with its favor, let it defend you with its protection from all evils so that the soundness of your life becomes our joy.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>GREGORIUS BARBARAE ET ANTONINAE.
Susceptis gloriae vestrae epistolis, quae pro verbis lacrimis loquebantur, non minor nos de dilectissimi filii nostri, quam vos de patris aegritudine maeror afficit. Nec enim extraneam possumus reputare tristitiam, quippe quae nobis caritatis lege fit propria. Sed quia in nulla desperatione de redemptoris nostri est misericordia diffidendum, animos vestros ad consolationem patris erigite, spem vestram in omnipotentis Dei manu ponite; et in ipsius protectione confidimus, quia et ab omni vos adversitate custodit atque tribulationem vestram exhilarat et secundum paterna desideria propitius vos ordinari concedit. Si vero debitum humanae sortis impleverit, nec tunc desperatio vos aliqua comprimat vel quorundam vobis verba terrorem incutiant, Nam post Deum, qui orfanorum gubernator atque protector est, sic de dulcissima gloria erimus vestra solliciti atque utilitati vestrae providere, ut possumus, adiuvante Domino festinamus. ut nec vos iniustorum hominum concussio ulla perturbet et nos debitum, quod de parentum vestrorum bonitate contraximus, vobis per omnia repensemus. Gratia itaque caelestis suo vos favore nutriat, sua protectione a malis omnibus defendat, ut vitae vestrae incolumitas gaudium nostrum fiat.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope shares the sisters' grief over the illness of their father and promises to protect them and their interests.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii I Papae Registum Epistolarum</em>, ed. Paulus Ewald and Ludovicus Hartmann (Berlin: Weidmann, 1887-91, repr. 1978), 11.23</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>601, February