---
letter_id: "24949"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (596, October)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (596, october)"
ltr_date: "596, October"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-13"
url: "/letter/1248.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 138
    name: Respecta
    iname: respecta
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory to Respecta, abbess of Marseille in Gaul
The request of a pious will should be accomplished by bestowing a result, so that both sincerity of devotion may shine forth laudably and the service requested may gain force with certainty.  Accordingly, for the monastery that was consecrated in honor of St. Cassian where you are known to preside, according to the petition of our children Dinamius and Aureliana, who we know have united with religious devotion the monastery to a house of their possession by connecting the buildings, we will allow these privileges, establishing that on the death of the abbess of the abovesaid monastery, not a stranger but one whom the congregation will choose for itself from its members should be ordained; the bishop of the same place should ordain her, if she will be judged worthy of this ministry.  Moreover, regarding the property and disposition of the same monastery we determine that no bishop or ecclesiastic should have any power, but we establish that these things in every respect should belong to the care of your responsibility or of whoever will be abbess in the same place after you.  Certainly on the day of the anniversary or dedication of the abovenoted monastery, it is fitting that the bishop celebrate the holy rites of masses there; nonetheless this duty must be carried out by him so that his chair is not placed there except on the aforesaid days when he celebrates the rites of masses; when he departs, his chair also should be removed from the same oratory.  On other days the duties of mass should be fulfilled by the priest who has been appointed by the same bishop.
	In addition, regarding the life and deeds of the handmaidens of God and the abbess who will be established in the abovesaid monastery, we determine that the bishop, according to the fear of God, will take care that if it happens that anyone among those dwelling there be submitted to punishment by a fault that requires it, he himself in all respects should punish according to the vigor of sacred canons.  So in these things established and conceded by us take care to show earnestly that you are a more attentive guard in the ordering of your congregation so that the malice of the wicked enemy finds nothing that can be stained there.  Accordingly, we command that everything that the document of this injunction contains for your monastery be observed forever in everything and by everyone with Christ protecting so that the benefits of privileges granted may endure always in their strength.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>GREGORIUS RE8PECTAE ABBATISSAE DE GALLIA MAXILIAE.
Piae postulatio voluntatis effectu debet prosequenti compleri, quatenus et devotionis sinceritas laudabiliter enitescat et utilitas postulata vires indubitanter adsumat. Proinde quod in honore sancti Cassiani est consecratum monasterio in quo praeesse dinosceris iuxta petitionem filiorum nostrorum Dinamii atque Aurelianae, qui id religiosa devotione domui iuris sui iunctis uniisse aedificiis comprobantur, haec privilegia praevidimus indulgeri constituentes, ut obeunte ante dicti monasterii abbatissi non extranea, sed quam congregatio sibi de suis elegerit ordinetur; quam tamen, si digna huic ministerio iudicata fuerit, eiusdem loci episcopus ordinet. In rebus autem vel dispositione eiusdem monasterii neque episcopum neque ecclesiasticorum quemquam aliquam habere decernimus potestatem, sed ad haec sollicitudinis tuae, vel quae post te in eodem loco fuerit abbatissa, curam statuimus per omnia pertinere Die siquidem natalis vel dedications monasterii suprascripti, episcopum missarum illic sacra convenit sollemnia celebrare; a quo tamen ita hoc est officium exsolvendum, ut cathedra eius nisi praedictis diebus, cum illic missarum sollemnia celebrat, non ponatur; quo discedente, simul etiam cathedra illius de eodem oratorio auferatur. Ceteris vero diebus per presbyterum qui ab eodem episcopo fuerit deputatus missarum officia peragantur.
Praeterea erga vitam actusque ancillarum Dei sive abbatissae, quae in suprascripto fuerit monasterio constituta episcopum secundum Dei timorem sollicitudinem statuimus adhibere, ut, si aliquam de illic habitantibus exigente culpa oportuerit ultioni summitti, ipse iuxta sacrorum canonum vigorem modis omnibus debeat vindicare. His igitur a nobis statutis atque concessis ita te in congregationis tuae dispositione custodiam stude sollicitiorem enixius exhibere, ut iniqui hostis malitia nihil ibi quod maculari possit inveniat. Haec igitur omnia quae huius pagina praeceptionis amplectitur monasterio tuo in omnibus et ab omnibus in perpetuo servari Christo protegente censemus, quatenus indultorum privilegiorum beneficia in sua semper inviolabiliter firmitate permaneant.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope grants Respecta's monastery the right to elect her successor, for the possessions and disposition of the monastery to be independent of ecclesiastical power, and for a bishop to say mass there on specified days of celebration.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii I Papae Registum Epistolarum</em>, ed. Paulus Ewald and Ludovicus Hartmann (Berlin: Weidmann, 1887-91, repr. 1978), 7.12.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>596, October