---
letter_id: "24952"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (598, October)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (598, october)"
ltr_date: "598, October"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-19"
url: "/letter/1251.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 141
    name: Praeiecta
    iname: praeiecta
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory to Praeiecta
Whenever one awaits our approval of certain contracts, ratification should strengthen them for the security of the parties, to prevent things negotiated from falling into doubt.  Accordingly, knowing what was agreed between your love and Fantinus, our defender and rector/bishop of the patrimony of the regions of Palermo, about the portions belonging to you in the holdings Leucas and Samanteria in the province of Sicily in the territory of Palermo and about a house located in the city of Palermo that you previously had offered with title of donation to our church, we grant our consent to these things, and through the document of this ratification we confirm everything as it was arranged between you.  We declare that none of those things will be nullified by us or our successors because it is very appropriate for the government of the church that whatever has been commanded or decided must not subsequently be disturbed by any resistance.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>GREGORIUS PRAEIECTAE.
Quotiens in quibusdam conventionibus noster expectatur assensus, ne in dubium veniant quae geruntur, ratihabitio eas pro securitate partium debet solidare.  Proinde cognoscentes, quid inter dilectionem tuam et Fantinum defensorem nostrum ac rectorem patrimonii partium Panormitanorum convenerit de portionibus tibi competentibus in massa Leucas et Samanteria in provincia Sicilia territorio Panormitano et domo in Panormitana civitate sita, quam ecclesiae nostrae dudum titulo donationis optuleras, nostrum in his adcommodamus assensum atque omnia, sicut inter vos gesta, sunt, per huius ratihabitionis paginam confirmamus nec quicquam eorum a nobis successoribusque nostris deduci in irritum profitemur, quia valde ecclesiasticae est moderationi conveniens, ut, quae ordinata fuerint vel decisa, nulla in posterum debeant refragatione turbari.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope confirms the agreement made between Praiecta and Fantinus, rector of Palermo, about certain holdings of hers and a house she donated to the church.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii I Papae Registum Epistolarum</em>, ed. Paulus Ewald and Ludovicus Hartmann (Berlin: Weidmann, 1887-91, repr. 1978), 9.23.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>598, October