---
letter_id: "24954"
title: "A letter from Childebert, king of the Franks (584)"
ititle: "a letter from childebert, king of the franks (584)"
ltr_date: "584"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/1253.html"
senders:
  - id: 21296
    name: Childebert, king of the Franks
    iname: childebert, king of the franks
    type: people
    url: /people/21296.html
receivers:
  - id: 133
    name: Italica
    iname: italica
    type: woman
    url: /woman/133.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Childebert, King of the Franks to the illustrious and magnificent noblewoman Italica
Since your glorious dignity’s opinion, which we knew was to be preferred over rumor, was happily relayed to us, our desire was that we inquire amicably by sending letters.  On account of this, laudably fulfilling the duties of your glorious highness’ greeting, and wishing that we may learn continually of your prosperity, we announce for your knowledge that we have sent faithfully in desire for the common benefit our legates of the present [letters] to the most serene prince of the Roman republic, if by the Lord’s command it pleases.  When with heavenly favor they will propose with you anything commanded to them, may you apply that to beneficial counsel, because with both peoples pacified, let it be useful to the regions as well as to those ruling them, and with the Lord’s assistance may each party of the exchange gain solace for itself by it.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>CHILDEBERTUS REX FRANCORUM INLUSTRO ATQUE MAGNIFICENTISSIME ITALICAE PATRICIAE.
Gloriosae dignitatis vestrae ad nos feliciter opinione delata, votivum nobis extitit, quam praeferri fama cognovimus, ut commeantibus litteris amicabiliter inquiramus. Quapropter gloriose celsitudinis vestrae salutis officia praedicabiliter exsolventes et, ut de vobis iugiter prospera cognoscere valeamus, optantes, notitiae vestre deferimus, praesentium legatarios nostros ad serenissimum principem Romane reipublicae, si Domini dictu conplacet, utilitatis communis studio fiducialiter distinasse; qui cum caelesti favore vobiscum aliqua sibi mandata contulerint, illud impendatis salubri consilii, quod, pacificatis utrisque gentibus, prosit regionibus pariter atque regnantibus, et habeat utraque pars vicissitudinarium de se sibi, Domino subministrante, solacium.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king exhorts Italica to support his legates in their attempt to arrange peace between the empire and the Frankish kingdom.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH,<em> Epistolae Austrasicae</em>, 144, ep.38.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>584