---
letter_id: "24958"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (603, June)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (603, june)"
ltr_date: "603, June"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-28"
url: "/letter/1257.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21362.html
receivers:
  - id: 146
    name: Eusebia
    iname: eusebia
    type: woman
    url: /woman/146.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory to the noblewoman Eusebia
Even if your mind, seized by riches or perhaps by tumultuous snares of the royal city, delays visiting us by means of letters, still it is our duty to follow with sweet charity even the estranged hearts of children and call them back, by praying and advising, to a beneficent spirit.  So, now fulfilling the due address of greeting, I urge your excellency to turn your mind away from the unnecessary upheavals of that city and meditate more on things of the soul than of the body.  Let it ponder that all things pass away.  Let it consider every day ceaselessly with tears and fear the terrible trial of the judge who will come, and let it recall to mind with fear that day when all must be confounded, so that then on that day it does not fear the judge’s wrath.  May almighty God by the inspiration of his spirit pour these things into your thoughts and both allow you to live here peacefully with your most noble spouse and to rejoice in the health of Lord Strategius, and may he permit you after long duration to come to eternal rewards.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>GREGORIUS EUSEBIAE PATRICIAE
Etsi occupata mens vestra divitiis aut fortasse regiae civitatis tumultuosis implicationibus nos per epistolas suas visitare postponit, nostrum tamen est etiam aversa filiorum corda dulci caritate prosequi eaque ad benignum animum et ammonendo et orando revocare. Unde nunc debitum salutationis alloquium solvens hortor, ut vestra excellentia a civitatis illius superfluis tumultibus animum avertat plusque ea quae animae quam quae sunt corporis cogitet. Transitoria esse omnia perpendat. Venturi iudicis examen tremendum cum metu et lacrimis cotidie sine cessatione consideret illumque diem, in quo perturbanda sunt omnia, cum timore ad animum reducat, ut iram iudicis in ipso iam die non timeat. Omnipotens autem Deus haec vestris cogitationibus adspiratione sui spiritus infundat vosque et hic cum nobilissimo coniuge tranquille vivere et de domni Strategii salute gaudere faciat atque post longa tempora ad aeterna praemia pervenire concedat.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope chides Eusebia gently for not writing and advises her to turn her mind away from the tumults of the city towards preparation for the next life.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii I Papae Registrum Epistolarum</em>, ed. Paulus Ewald and Ludovicus Hartmann (Berlin: Weidmann, 1887-91, MGH, 123-24, ep.13.35.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>603, June