---
letter_id: "24959"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (603, July)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (603, july)"
ltr_date: "603, July"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-02"
url: "/letter/1258.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21362.html
receivers:
  - id: 147
    name: Leontia
    iname: leontia
    type: woman
    url: /woman/147.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory to the venerable Leontia
What words suffice to express, what mind can comprehend the great thanks we owe to almighty God for the serenity of your empire, that such harsh burdens of long duration have been lifted from our necks and the mild yoke of imperial supremacy has returned, which subjects should be happy to bear?  So to the creator of all let glory be rendered by choirs of angels singing hymns in heaven, let a deed of thanks be paid by men on earth, because the universal republic, which has suffered many wounds of grief, now finds the remedies of your consolation.  Accordingly it is necessary that we implore more earnestly the mercy of almighty God that he always hold the heart of your piety in his right hand and distribute its thoughts with the strength of heavenly grace, so that the more truly your tranquility will know how to serve zealously the ruler of all, the more directly it will have the power to rule those serving it.  May he make his defenders for love of the catholic faith those whom he has made our emperors by his benign work.  May he infuse into your minds both zeal and gentleness so that with pious fervor you may always have the power not to leave unavenged whatever is transgressed against God and if anything is committed against you to tolerate by sparing it.  But he gives to us in your piety the clemency of Pulcheria Augusta, who for her zeal for the catholic faith was called in the holy synod the new Helena.  May the mercy of almighty God grant to you a longer time to live with the most pious lord, so that the longer your life extends, the more strongly may the consolation of all your subjects be assured.
	Perhaps I should have requested that your tranquility hold as especially commended the church of the blessed Peter apostle, which thus far has struggled with grievous plots.  But I who know that you love Almighty God must not ask that which you demonstrate of your own accord from the goodness of your piety.  For the more you fear the founder of all, the more fully you may love the church of him to whom it was said: You are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell will not prevail against it [Matth. 16:18] and to whom it is said I will give to you the key of the kingdom of heaven; whatever you bind on earth, it will also be bound in heaven, and whatever you release on earth, it will also be released in heaven [Matth 16:19].  So we have no doubt with what strong love you bind yourself to him whom you desire to release you from all the debts of sins.  Therefore may he himself be the guardian of your empire, may he be your protector on earth, may he be an intercessor for you in heaven, so that because you make subjects rejoice in your empire by lifting harsh burdens, after long duration of years you may rejoice in the heavenly kingdom.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>GREGORIUS LEONTIAE AUGUSTAE
Quae linguae loqui, qui animus cogitare sufficiat, quantas de serenitate vestri imperii omnipotenti Deo gratias debemus, quod tam dura longi temporis pondera cervicibus nostris amota sunt et imperialis culminis lene iugum rediit, quod libeat portare subiectis? Reddatur ergo creatori omnium ab hymnidicis angelorum choris gloria in caelo, persolvatur ab hominibus gratiarum actio in terra, quia universa respublica, quae multa maeroris pertulit vulnera, iam nunc consolationis vestrae invenit fomenta. Unde nobis necesse est omnipotentis Dei misericordiam enixius exorare, ut cor vestrae pietatis sua semper dextera teneat eiusque cogitationes caelestis gratiae ope dispenset, quatenus tranquillitas vestra tanto rectius valeat sibi servientes regere, quanto dominatori omnium noverit verius deservire. In amore catholicae fidei faciat defensores suos, quos fecit ex benigno opere imperatores nostros. Infundat in vostris mentibus zelum simul et mansuetudinem, ut pio semper fervore valeatis et, quicquid in Deo exceditur, non inultum relinquere et, si quid vobis delinquitur, parcendo tolerare. Sed dat nobis in vestra pietate Pulcheriae Augustae clementiam, quae pro zelo catholicae fidei in sancta synodo Helena nova vocata est. Omnipotentis Dei misericordia largiora vobis cum piissimo domino vivendi spatia concedat, ut, quo vestra longius vita extenditur, subiectorum omnium consolatio validius confirmetur.
Rogare forsitan debui, ut ecclesiam beati Petri apostoli, quae nunc usque gravibus insidiis laboravit, haberet vestra tranquillitas specialiter commendatam. Sed qui scio. quia omnipotentem Deum diligitis, non debeo petere quod sponte ex benignitate vestrae pietatis exhibetis Quanto enim plus timetis conditorem omnium, tanto eius potestis ecclesiam amplius amare, cui dictum est: 'Tu es Petrus, et super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam, et portae inferi non praevalebunt adversus eam' et cui dicitur: 'Tibi dabo claves regni caelorum: quodcumque Iigaveris super terram, ligatum erit et in caelo, et quaecumque solveris super terram, soluta erunt et in caelo'. Unde nobis dubium non est, quam forti amore ad eum vos stringitis, per quem solvi ab omnibus peccatorum nexibus desideratis. Ipse igitur sit vestri custos imperii, sit vobis protector in terra, sit pro vobis intercessor in caelo, ut per hoc, quod relevatis duris ponderibus in vestro imperio subiectos gaudere facitis, post multa annorum tempora in caelesti regno gaudeatis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope congratulates Leontia with enthusiasm on her accession to imperial rule, encourages her to religious piety, and commends the faith and the Roman church to her, recommending the empress Pulcheria Augusta as a model.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii I Papae Registrum Epistolarum</em>, ed. Paulus Ewald and Ludovicus Hartmann (Berlin: Weidmann, 1887-91, MGH, 123-24, ep.13.42.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>603, July