---
letter_id: "23836"
title: "A letter from Agnes of Poitiers, empress (10/05/1056)"
ititle: "a letter from agnes of poitiers, empress (10/05/1056)"
ltr_date: "10/05/1056"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-13"
url: "/letter/126.html"
senders:
  - id: 23
    name: Agnes of Poitiers, empress
    iname: agnes of poitiers, empress
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21194
    name: abbot Hugo of Cluny
    iname: abbot hugo of cluny
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To her beloved father, worthy of all respect, abbot Hugo, Agnes, greeting and devoted service, in whatever way God commands.
Since my lute has turned to grief [Job 30:31], I give back sighs for joy, lamentable mourning for the exultation your letters brought me.  Yet my heart dissolving from sorrow flees from recollecting altogether.  For that reason and because the swift report of ills has, I believe, announced my grief to you, I pray that my Lord whom you did not wish to preserve long in the flesh, you will at least commend to God in prayer with your convent now that he is dead, and you will obtain for your son [godson], long his heir, that he be worthy to God, and any disturbances that arise against him in your parts of the kingdom you will strive to calm by your counsel.  Fare well, father.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilectissimo patri et omni acceptione digno HV[goni] abbati A[gnes], quaequae modo Deo iubente sit, salutem et deuotum obsequium.
Quia in “luctum uersa est cithara mea,” pro gaudio gemitum, pro exultatione, quam litterae uestrae fecerant, refero lamentabilem planctum. Cor tamen merore tabidum refugit ex toto referre. Quapropter et quia uelox fama malorum, ut credo, meum uobis dolorem nuntiauit, precor, ut dominum meum, quem diutius in carne seruare noluistis, saltim orando cum uestro conuentu defunctum Deo commendetis, filiumque uestrum diu sibi heredem fore ac Deo dignum obtineatis, et turbas, si quae contra eum in uestris uicinis partibus regni sui oriuntur, etiam consilio sedare studeatis. Vale, pater.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>After the death of her husband, Henry III, the empress attempts to gain the abbot’s good will for her son, Henry IV, who is Hugh’s godson, despite the enmity between his father and the abbot.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>"Zwei Briefe der Kaiserin Agnes," <em>Historisches Jahrbuch</em> 104 (1984), 423</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>10/05/1056