---
letter_id: "24961"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (601, September)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (601, september)"
ltr_date: "601, September"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-10"
url: "/letter/1260.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 149
    name: Savinella
    iname: savinella
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory to Savinella, Columba, and Galla, equally.
Glorious daughter, hearing the good news of your work gladdens me very much, because you proceed to carry out things through which, as you mercifully assist those in need, you yourself obtain mercy, and by nourishing others in the present you fulfill celestial good deeds for eternity.  And so because the one you trust is faithful, entrust as secure what he has bestowed so that on the day of tribulation you receive what you expend.  For the excellent preacher says:  I know whom I have believed in and I am certain that he is able to preserve my commitment for that day [2 Tim 1:12].  Behold, glorious daughter, consider how much certainty there should be in good works and may your hand be generous in deed so that it may be to you what is written: Hide alms in the purse of the poor and this will prevail for you [Eccl. 29:15].  Therefore whoever desires to have abundant fruit in heaven should not neglect to sow, while there is time, so that on the day of harvest he gathers bundles with joy.  For They that sow in tears will reap in joy [Ps. 125:5].  But let the apostle say what sort of future harvest will result from this sort of sowing: He that sows in his flesh from the flesh will also reap corruption; but he that sows in the spirit from the spirit will also reap eternal life [Gal. 6:8].  But so that the scarcity of poverty not find us, let us prepare this harvest for ourselves with manifold sowing and the more richly we desire to be sated, the more generously we should bestow on him from whom we have received all.  For the Lord himself says about himself: For I was hungry and you gave me to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me to drink; I was a stranger and you took me in; naked and you covered me [Matth. 25:35], et cetera, and in conclusion he adds: Amen I say to you, as long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, you did it to me [Matth. 25:40].  Therefore do this more zealously and in doing these things ask that nothing be repaid to you on earth, because for those who desire heavenly rewards worldly things are nothing.  But direct your desires there where whatever is paid back has no end.  Therefore doing good you should not falter, so that you can store treasure for yourself there where neither rust nor the worm destroys and where thieves neither dig nor pilfer.
	Further, greeting your glory with paternal affection we indicate that we have sent, through the bearer of the present (letters), Hilary, our cartulary, a key from the most sacred body of the blessed Peter, prince of the apostles, with which a blessing from his chains is also contained.  Hung around your neck, let that which was the cause of martyrdom for him become, with his intercession, the grace of absolution for you.  May almighty God guard you in fear of him and thus always rouse your heart to good work so that he may both bestow his grace on you here and subsequently lead you to eternal joys.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>GREGORIUS SAVINELLAE, COLUMBAE ET GALLAE A PARIBUS
Satis me, gloriosa filia, operationis tuae audita bona laetificant, quod illa agere perhiberis, per quae, dum egentibus misericorditer subvenis, ipsa misericordiam consequaris et alios temporaliter nutriendo bonis in aeternum caelestibus satieris. Et ideo quia fidelis est cui credis, secura commenda ea quae tribuit, ut, in die tribulationis recipias quod impendis. Ait namque egregius praedicator: 'Scio, cui credidi, et certus sum, quia potens est depositum meum servare in illum diem'. Ecce, gloriosa filia, quanta sit bonorum operum certitudo, considera, et larga sit semper manus in opere, ut fiat vobis quod scriptum est: 'Absconde elemosinam in sinu pauperis, et haec pro te exorabit'. Quisquis igitur copiosum in caelis fructum habere desiderat, seminare, dum tempus est, non omittat, ut manipulos in die messis cum laetitia colligat. Nam 'qui seminant in lacrimis, in gaudio metent'. Sed qualis messis ex huius modi semente futura sit, dicat apostolus: 'Qui seminat in carne sua, de carne et metet. corruptionem; qui autem seminat in spiritu, de spiritu et metet vitam aeternam'. Ne vero inopia nos egestatis inveniat, hanc nobis messem satione multiplici praeparemus et, quanto uberius satiari cupimus, tanto ei a quo totum accepimus largius conferamus. Nam ipse de se Dominus dicit: 'Esurivi enim, et dedistis mihi manducare; sitivi, et dedistis mihi bibere; hospes fui, et collegistis me: nudus, et operuistis me' et cetera, atque in conclusione subiungitur: 'Amen dico vobis, quamdiu fecistis uni ex his fratribus meis minimis, mihi fecistis'. Hoc ergo studiosius agite et haec agentes in terra vobis retribui nihil quaeratis, quia superna desiderantibus temporalia nulla sunt. Sed ibi desideria vestra figite, ubi, quicquid retribuitur, finem non suscipit. Bonum ergo facientes non deficiatis, ut illic vobis thesauros thesaurizare possitis, ubi neque aerugo neque tinea demolitur et ubi fures non effodiunt nec furantur.
Praeterea gloriam vestram paterno salutantes affectu indicamus per latorem praesentium Hilarum cartularium nostrum clavem nos a sacratissimo corpore beati Petri apostolorum principis transmisisse, in qua de catenis quoque ipsius benedictio continetur.  Quae collo vestro suspensa, hoc vobis eo intercedente gratia absolutionis fiat, quod illi fuit causa martyrii. Omnipotens Deus in suo vos timore custodiat atque sic cor vestrum ad bonam semper operationem accendat, ut et hic vobis suam gratiam tribuat et ad gaudia vos postmodum aeterna perducat.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Columba and Galla are presumably noblewomen like Savinella, living with her in Africa.  The letter does not reveal whether they are sisters or daughters or what their relationship might be.  The Hilary mentioned is a notary, whom Gregory sent with a letter (1.73) to Gennadius, a patrician and administrator for Africa.  He is also mentioned in a letter to Dynamius (3.33), as bringing money back from the revenue of Gaul to Rome.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii I Papae Registrum Epistolarum</em>, ed. Paulus Ewald and Ludovicus Hartmann (Berlin: Weidmann, 1887-91, MGH, 123-24, ep.12.2.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>601, September