---
letter_id: "24970"
title: "A letter from Matilda of Tuscany, countess of Tuscany, duchess of Lorraine (1072-76, April 18)"
ititle: "a letter from matilda of tuscany, countess of tuscany, duchess of lorraine (1072-76, april 18)"
ltr_date: "1072-76, April 18"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-11"
url: "/letter/1269.html"
senders:
  - id: 29
    name: Matilda of Tuscany, countess of Tuscany, duchess of Lorraine
    iname: matilda of tuscany, countess of tuscany, duchess of lorraine
    type: woman
    url: /woman/29.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the holy and indivisible trinity.  Beatrice, by God’s grace duke and countess, and Matilda, her beloved daughter, to the canons of the holy church of Lucca perpetually.  Whenever our faithful subjects propose things that are in harmony with the motive of justice and pertain to the salvation of our souls, not only should they not be denied with stubborn mind, but they should be granted laudably with ready heart and benevolent mind.  We should especially not reject the just requests of those who intercede with the divine on our behalf, but we should rightly assent so that we will obtain the grace and mercy of almighty God, and our faithful, so that they are more faithful, may rejoice to have obtained what they seek.  And therefore, inclined to the devout requests of Bardus, chancellor of the aforesaid holy church of Lucca and Lambert, archpriest and other brothers and canons of the same church, we have received under our protection and defense that dwelling that was built for the hospitality and refuge of the poor, near the same church of the diocese of St. Martin and near the church of St. Alexander and near the postern gate which is said to be of Leo the judge, which Rainer of the late Bonia gave to St. Martin to fulfill this work.  Accordingly, we have received the aforesaid house with all its movable and immovable property, which now belongs to it or henceforth will be seen to belong with God’s assent, and all the farmers, vassals and residents pertaining in any way to that venerable place, such that whatever will be given or left or acquired for that venerable place with the aforesaid people should be absolute and free from any attack, trouble and opposition of all persons.  Therefore, commanding, we order that no count, viscount, chamberlain, tax collector, deacon, emissary, or any person great or small should dare to disturb or confound the said venerable place and all its rectors and farmers and all things belonging to it now or thereafter, nor presume in any way or by any contrivance to introduce himself into those properties or people, except only for the safety and defense of that venerable place, so that everything that was conferred there by the devotion of the faithful for praise of God and consolation of the poor be released from any fiscal impost and claim of any tribute or toll.  Concerning this case we wish and by our authority we confirm that if any insolent or rebellious person with reckless boldness will attempt to violate or infringe this our sound command through any contrivance or presume to come against us and this venerable place and will not fully observe all that was said above, he will stand to pay one hundred pounds of gold in the name of punishment, half to our estate, half to that venerable place where the offense was committed, and moreover he will suffer the disturbance of our indignation, and punishment of most severe vengeance.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine sanctae et individuae trinitatis. Beatrix, gratia dei dux et comitissa, et Matilda, dilecta eius filia, canonicis sanctae Lvcensis aecclesiae x in perpetuum. Quotiens illa a nostris fidelibus postulamur, que et equitatis rationi concordant et ad salutem pertinent animarum nostrarum, non solum obstinato animo non sunt deneganda, verum etiam prompto corde et mente benigna laudabiliter sunt concedenda. Nec enim iustis precibus maxime eorum, qui ex divina nos parte interpellant, reluctari, sed annuere rite debemus, quatenus et dei omnipotentis nobis misericordiam et gratiam conciliemus et fideles nostri, ut fideliores existant, ea, que petunt, se impetrasse letentur. Et ideo inclinati devotis precibus Bardi predicte sancte Lucensis ecclesie primicerii et Lamberti archipresbiteri seu reliquorum fratrum et canonicorum eiusdem ecclesie, sub nostra tutela et defensione recepimus mansionem illam, que edificata est ad hospitium et susceptionem pauperum iuxta eandem ecclesiam episcopatus sancti Martini et iuxta ecclesiam sancti Alexandri ac prope pusterulam, que dicitur Leonis iudicis, quam Rainerius quondam Bonie donavit sancto Martino ad hoc opus explendum. Recepimus itaque prefatam domum cum universis rebus suis mobilibus et immobilibus, que ad eam modo pertinent vel inantea deo annuente pertinere videbuntur, et universos colonos, aldiones seu manentes ad ipsum venerabilem locum aliquo modo pertinentes, ita ut quodcumque datum vel relictum seu adquisitum fuerit ipsi venerabili loco, cum iam dictis personis sit absolutum et liberum ab omni impugnatione et molestia vel contrarietate omnium personarum. Quapropter precipientes iubemus, ut iam dictum venerabilem locum et omnes eius rectores sive colonos nec non omnia ad eum modo vel deinceps pertinentia nullus comes, vicecomes, castaldius, exactor, decanus, vocimissarius seu quaelibet magna vel parva persona audeat inquietare vel conturbare, nec aliquo modo aut ingenio presumat de ipsis rebus aut personis se intromittere, nisi tantum ad salvationem et defensionem ipsius venerabilis loci, quatenus ea, que ad laudem dei et refrigerium pauperum ibi collata fuerint ex devotione fidelium, sint absoluta ab omni illatione fiscali et titulo cuiuslibet tributi vel vectigalis. Hac de causa volumus et nostra auctoritate firmamus, ut, si quis temerario ausu hanc salubrem nostram iussionem per aliquod ingenium infringere vel violare temptaverit et contumax aut rebellis contra nos et ipsum venerabilem locum venire presumpserit et omnia, que superius dicta sunt, pleniter non observaverit, centum libras auri poene nomine compositurus existat, medietatem camere nostre, medietatem ipsi venerabili loco, cui iniuria illata fuerit, et insuper commotionem subiturus nostre indignationis, patiatur penas severissime ultionis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Beatrice and her daughter Matilda, who were ruling together, take the hospice for the poor under their protection, at the request of the chancellor of the church of Lucca and the archpriest and canons.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1  Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Die Urkunden und Briefe der Markgräfin Mathilde von Tuszien,</em> ed. Elke Goez and Werner Goez (Hanover: Hahnsche Buchhandlung, 1998), ep.18, 78-79.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1072-76, April 18