---
letter_id: "24977"
title: "A letter from Matilda of Tuscany, countess of Tuscany, duchess of Lorraine (1107, January 24)"
ititle: "a letter from matilda of tuscany, countess of tuscany, duchess of lorraine (1107, january 24)"
ltr_date: "1107, January 24"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-11"
url: "/letter/1276.html"
senders:
  - id: 29
    name: Matilda of Tuscany, countess of Tuscany, duchess of Lorraine
    iname: matilda of tuscany, countess of tuscany, duchess of lorraine
    type: woman
    url: /woman/29.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the holy and indivisible trinity.  In the year of the incarnation of our lord Jesus Christ 1106, ninth kalends of February, fifteenth indiction.  Since it is worthy and just to faithfully and devotedly serve and, as fitting, to venerate and enrich with property holy and venerable places and all those fearing God, therefore to the monastery of St. Paul the apostle located in the outskirts of Parma, where now lady Dorothy with God’s assent is known to preside as abbess, I Matilda, countess and duchess and daughter of late Boniface, who was likewise duke and marquis, for the healing of my soul and of my parents, concede, hand over and establish and with all right belonging to me confirm the church of St. Mary of Bosco, which is of the court of Campitello, with twelve acres of land belonging to the same church, and also land from Castellare and land of Prevvaldo and one estate which was governed and labored by men who are called Galbacci, and one field at the court of Castelluchio, which was formerly of Richard, and also one field, which was of the wife of the priest Theutaldino, and also a field of Coazia, moreoever a manse, which was labored by men who are called Waldoni, and a field of Bosceto and also a manse, which is ruled by men who are called Ermerathi, everything and from everything completely, whatever thence in the abovenoted territories is known to belong to me in any way, without any contradiction or reclamation of me or my heirs or representatives of heirs.  Indeed I pledge and promise that I, as above countess Matilda, will defend the abovenoted donation, as read above, entirely from any man contradicting.  If we will not be able to defend it or if we seek to withdraw anything through any contrivance thenceforth from the party of that church, then I promise to restore in twofold the abovenoted territorial properties to the party of the church with stipulation supported.  Moreover, I make donation to the party of this church by small knife, knotted straw, glove, clod of earth and branch of tree.  And thereby having driven myself out I have guaranteed and made myself absent, and I relinquished (it) to the party of the church to be held, so that this my donation, as read above, should always remain firm and stable.
	Enacted happily in the castle of Campitello in the presence of lord Ugo, bishop.
	+ (I) Matilda by God’s grace, if she is anything, signed below.
	Seal +++++++ of the hands of Albert, count, and Arialdo of Melegnano and Gerard, son of Boso and Albert, son of Manfred and Belentio of Guastalla and Alberic of Nonantola and Arderic of Campitello.  There were Sigefred of Campitello and Ugo, son of Ragimund and Bontempo and Viscovello and many others.
	(S.N.) I, John, judge palatine, writer of this document of donation, completed and gave it, subsequently delivered.
	(S.) I, Aubert, judge, was present and as requested, signed below.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>(S. N.)  In nomine sancte et individue trinitatis. Anno ab incarnacione domini nostri Iesu Christi millesimo centesimo sexto, nono kalend(a)s februarii, indicione quintadecima. Quoniam dignum et iustum est sanctis ac venerabili[bus locis et] omnibus deum timentibus fideliter et devote servire atque, prout decet, venerari et bonis suis ditare, ideoque monasterio sancti Pauli apostoli scito in suburbio Parmensi, [ubi nunc donna] Dorothe dei nutu abbatissa preesse videtur, ego Matildis comitissa et ducatrix et filia quondam Bonefacii, qui fuit similiter dux et marchio, pro [re]me[dio anime me]e et parentum meorum concedo, trado atque constituo et omni iure ad me pertinente confirmo ecclesiam sancte Marie de Bosco, que est de [cu]rte Campitelli, cum duocim iugeribus de terra ad eandem ecclesiam pertinentibus, nec non et terram de Castellare et terram Prevvaldii nec non et massariciam unam, [que fi]t directa et laborata per homines, qui dicuntur Galbacii, atque braidam unam in curte Castellucli, que fuit quondam Richardi, etiam et campum unum, qui fuit Teuthaldini presbiterisse, seu et campum de Coatia, insuper et mansum, qui fit laboratus per homines, qui dicuntur Waldoni, et campum de Bosceto, nec non et mansum unum, [qui] regitur per homines, qui dicuntur Ermerathi, omnia et ex omnibus in integrum, quicquid inde de suprascriptis rebus territoriis mihi quoquo modo pertinere videtur, sine omni mea meorumque heredum ac proheredum contradicione vel repeticione. Equidem spondeo atque promitto me ego, que supra comitissa Matildis, suprascriptam concessionem, qualiter superius legitur in integrum, ab omni contradicente homine defensar[e]. Quod si defensare non potuerimus aut si parti ipsius ecclesie exinde aliquid per quodvis ingenium subtrahere quesierimus, tunc in duplum suprascriptas res ter[rito]rias parti ipsius ecclesie restaurare promitto cum stipulacione subnixa. Insuper per cultellum, festucam nodatam et wantonem et wasonem terre et ramum arboris parti ipsius ecclesie facio concessionem. Et me exinde foras expulsa warpivi et absentem me feci, et parti ipsius ecclesie habendum reliqui, ut hec mea concessio, sicut supra legitur, firma et stabilis semper permaneat.
Actum castro Campitelli in presentia do(mi)ni Ugonis episcopi, feliciter.
+ Matilda dei gratia, si quid est, subscripsi.
Signum +++++++ manuum Albertii comitis et Arialdi de Melegnano seu Gerardi filii Bosonis et Alberti filii Manfredi et Belentionis de Uuarstalla et Alberici de Nonantula et Arderici de Campitello. Ibi erat Sigefredus de Ca[mpitello] et Vgo filii Ragimundi et Bontempo et Uiscouello et ceteri plures.
(S. N.) Ego Iohannes palatinus iudex scriptor huius cartule concessionis post traditam complevi et dedi.
(S.) Ego Aubertus iudex interfui et rogatus subscripsi.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Matilda transfers properties to the convent of St. Paul outside Parma, under abbess Dorothy.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1. Ashleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Die Urkunden und Briefe der Markgräfin Mathilde von Tuszien,</em> ed. Elke Goez and Werner Goez (Hanover: Hahnsche Buchhandlung, 1998), ep.99.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1107, January 24