---
letter_id: "24981"
title: "A letter from Thomas Becket, archbishop of Canterbury (1169)"
ititle: "a letter from thomas becket, archbishop of canterbury (1169)"
ltr_date: "1169"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-02"
url: "/letter/1280.html"
senders:
  - id: 21599
    name: Thomas Becket, archbishop of Canterbury
    iname: thomas becket, archbishop of canterbury
    type: people
    url: /people/21599.html
receivers:
  - id: 153
    name: Margaret of Navarre
    iname: margaret of navarre
    type: woman
    url: /woman/153.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Archbishop Thomas of Canterbury to Queen Margaret of Sicily
To the most serene and dearest lady in Christ, Margaret, illustrious queen of the Sicilians, Thomas, by divine dispensation humble minister of the church of Canterbury, greeting: so to rule on earth in Sicily that she may for ever rejoice with the angels in glory.
Although we have never seen your face, we cannot be ignorant of your renown, made illustrious by the distinction of noble blood, and adorned by the reputation of many outstanding virtues, and the brilliance of your fame renders it glorious in numberless celebrations. But among the other virtues, which we and the others who hear about them gladly embrace, we are obliged to your generosity, which has given solace to our fellow-exiles, outlawed for Christ, in their affliction, and to our own relatives, who fled to your lands before the face of the persecutor,  and we now offer you even greater thanks for that kindness, with all the devotion we can. For it is a large part of true religion and very pleasing to God, if clemency gives comfort to those suffering for justice, if wealth supports the poor, if wide and untrammelled power makes common cause with the needs of the saints. God is propitiated by such sacrifices, earthly fame is enhanced and extended, and the cordial good-will of all good men is gained. By these favours, nevertheless, among others, you have deserved in particular that we should devote ourselves wholly to your service to the utmost of our capacity and capability. As the first fruits of the devotion which we have been able to show to your excellency in the present circumstances, we recently presented your requests to the most Christian king, with our support, as you can judge from the requests which he made to our dear friend, the illustrious king of Sicily, and from the words of the venerable prior of Crepy, whom knowledge of letters, sincerity of life, and integrity of reputation render loveable and commendable to all good men. He is truly a man of excellent religious life, sound doctrine, and perfect sanctity, as far as human evaluation can judge in the circumstances, and we desire and entreat your highness to hear him with as much respect as if the whole Western Church were present at your feet. Indeed you should do this out of respect both for him personally and also for the merits and authority of the church of Cluny, whose business he is conducting, which is distinguished in the Latin world for having enjoyed the reputation for perfection in the monastic life like a private possession from the days of our forefathers. If it please you, believe what he tells you about the other matters on our behalf as you would believe us. Farewell.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Thomas Cantuariensis archiepiscopus Margarete Regine Siculorum
Serenissime domine, et in Christo karissime Margarete, illustri regine Siculorum, Thomas divina dispensatione Cantuariensis ecclesie minister humilis, salutem, et sic temporaliter regnare in Sicilia, ut cum angelis eternaliter exultet in gloria.
Licet faciem uestram non nouerimus, gloriam tamen non possumus ignorare, quam et generosi sanguinis illustrat claritas, et multarum magnarumque uirtutum decorat titulus, et fame celebritas numerosis preconiis reddit insignem. Sed inter ceteras uirtutes, quas cum aliis auditoribus gratanter amplectimur, liberalitati uestre debemus, et qua nunc possumus deuotione gratias referimus ampliores, que coexules nostros, proscriptos Christi, et consanguineos nostras, fugientes ad partes uestras a facie persecutoris, consolata est in tribulatione sua. Que profecto magna pars uere et Deo gratissime religionis est, si pro iusticia patientibus dementia ferat solatium, si pauperibus opulentia suffragetur, si sanctorum necessitatibus absoluta potestatis communicet amplitudo. Talibus enim hostiis promeretur Deus, exhilarescit et dilatatur gloria temporalis, et omnium bonorum gratiosus   conciliatur affectus. His meritis inter alios specialiter tamen promeruistis et nos, qui totum id quod sumus et possumus ad uestrum deuouimus obsequium. Cuius deuotionis primitias quas pro tempore potuimus excellentie uestre nuper optulimus, preces uestras apud regem Christianissimum promouentes, sicut perpendere potestis ex precibus eius dilecto nostra illustri regi Sicilie porrectis,  et ex uerbis uenerabilis uiri prioris Crispiniacensis, quem et eruditio litterarum, et uite sinceritas et integritas fame, bonis omnibus amabilem et commendabilem reddunt. Est enim uir probatissime conuersationis sane doctrine, et, quantum ad humanum spectat examen, perfecte pro tempore sanctitatis, quem tanta reuerentia a sublimitate uestra desideramus et petimus exaudiri, quanta totam occidentalem ecclesiam, si uestris pedibus assisteret, audiretis. Et hoc quidem tum pro sue persone reuerentia, tum pro merito et auctoritate Cluniacensis ecclesie, cuius procurat necessitates; que in orbe Latino dinoscitur, a diebus patrum nostrorum in monastica religione perfectionis gloriam quasi propriam possedisse. In ceteris que uobis ex parte nostra dixerit, ei, si placet, credatis ut nobis. Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The archbishop commends the queen’s support of various exiles, including two of his nephews.  He has passed on to the king (Henry II of England) her requests, apparently for help to bring about the return of the exiled Stephen of Perche.  The bearer of this letter, Thibauld, prior of St-Arnoult de Crepy en Valois, will convey more information than Thomas puts in writing.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 The translation and the text are published here with the generous permission of the translator and editor, Anne J. Duggan, The Correspondence of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1162-70 (Oxford:  Clarendon,  2000) v.2.966-71, ep.221.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Duggan, Anne J., <em>The Correspondence of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1162-70</em> (Oxford: Clarendon, 2000) v.2.966-71, ep.221. Reprinted with the generous permission of the translator and editor.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1169