---
letter_id: "24993"
title: "A letter from Bernard of Clairvaux, abbot (1132)"
ititle: "a letter from bernard of clairvaux, abbot (1132)"
ltr_date: "1132"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-12"
url: "/letter/1292.html"
senders:
  - id: 21275
    name: Bernard of Clairvaux, abbot
    iname: bernard of clairvaux, abbot
    type: people
    url: /people/21275.html
receivers:
  - id: 163
    name: Odiarda, Abbess of Faverney
    iname: odiarda, abbess of faverney
    type: woman
    url: /woman/163.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Bernard, called Abbot of Clairvaux to A., Abbess of Faverney:  Wishes her renown for chastity and grace.
	THESE BROTHERS in approaching my humble self for the counsel of their souls concerning your good zeal that they say you have for the reform of that place over which you are in charge by the grace of God, have given us much happiness.  We advise and beseech you to busy yourself as much with the reform of behavior as with the repair of houses.  Moreover, it is most necessary that you diligently take care not only of the monastery, but also of the guesthouse of God, in which the above mentioned brothers serve under your command, in order that you may, of course, preserve it secure and free from all exaction and trouble from your servants and clients.  As to that what had been collected for the benefit of the aforesaid house by other abbesses before you,  and which, so we hear, you took away upon the bad  advice of those people, we ask you to restore it.  For just as it concerns your sollicitude that you should destroy and correct the evil works of the other abbesses, so whatever good they may have done ought you not only firmly and unwaveringly hold on to, but even increase and multiply.  Also concerning the priest who while living in the house appears to have his own property in the world, make him give up his property or leave.  Farewell, and on account of the good we have heard of you, if I am able to be of any help, you can rely on me as a friend.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Bernardus, vocatus abbas de Claravalle, A., Abbatissae Faberniacensi: pudicitiae et gratiae titulum. 
Fratres isti pro consilio animarum suarum parvitatem nostram adeuntes, de vestro bono studio, quod in emendando loco, cui gratia Dei praeestis, habere vos perhibent, non parum nos laetificaverunt. Monemus autem et obsecramus devotionem vestram, quod sicut in reficiendis domibus, ita renovandis moribus operam detis. Non solum autem de monasterio, sed etiam de hospitali domo Dei, cui sub manu vestra praedicti fratres deserviunt, intentissime necesse est curam geratis, quatenus videlicet ab omni exactione et infestatione ministrorum seu clientum vestrorum securam ac liberam custodiatis, quodque illorum pravo, ut audivimus, consilio eidem domui ab aliis ante vos abbatissis collatum abstulistis, precamur ut restituatis. Sicut enim ad vestram sollicitudinem pertinet aliarum malefacta destruere aut corrigere, sic illarum, si qua bona egerunt, non solum firma et inconcussa tenere, sed etiam augmentare et multiplicare debetis. Presbyterum quoque, qui in ipsa domo habitans, suam adhuc foris rem habere videtur, aut proprium deferere, aut de domo exire cogatis.  Valete, et propter bonum quod de vobis audivimus, de nobis, si quid valemus, familiariter confidite.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bernard commends the abbess for her attempts to restore the house, and encourages also in the reform of its way of life.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1. Rev. Maurus Mount provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Bernardi, Opera,</em> ed. J. Leclercq, H. Rochais (Rome: Cistercians, 1974), v.7, Ep.391, p.361-62.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1132