---
letter_id: "23723"
title: "A letter from Emma, queen of the Franks (987-988)"
ititle: "a letter from emma, queen of the franks (987-988)"
ltr_date: "987-988"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/13.html"
senders:
  - id: 4
    name: Emma of Italy
    iname: emma of italy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/4.html
receivers:
  - id: 21327
    name: empress Theophanu, her sister-in-law
    iname: empress theophanu, her sister-in-law
    type: people
    url: /people/21327.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>May the piety of your name assist the afflicted captive from her predators.  I once had family and rank and the name of kings.  Now, as if without family or rank, I am afflicted with all kinds of abuses, made the captive handmaid of most cruel enemies.  And how will that impious K[arl, Charles of Lorraine] hear my voice who scorned to hear yours?  You indeed held me worthy in your memory, who ordered what you wanted to be done for me.  But since he occupied the royal city [Laon], he does not think it fitting to his name to submit to anyone.  I do not wish to unfold his spirit, by which he vainly promises himself kingdoms.  This only I pray, that he not be dashed against me, a woman, when he is pounded back into the seas.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Pietas vestri nominis subveniat afflicte, a praedonibus captivate. Et michi quondam fuit et genus et dignitas ac regium nomen. Nunc quasi sine genere, sine dignitate omnibus afficior contumeliis, ancilla captiva crudelissimorum hostium facta. Et quomodo ille impius K. vocem meam audiret, qui vestram audire contempsit? Et vos quidem me vestra memoria dignam habuistis, que fieri circa me velletis, imperastis. Hic quia regiam urbem occupavit, parere alicui non putat suo nomine convenire. Nolo eius spiritum explicare, quo sibi regna inaniter promittit. Hoc tamen oro ne in me feminam illidatur, dum in mares retunditur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Emma writes from captivity in Laon to ask Theophanu’s help, although the empress’s attempts to win Emma’s freedom by diplomatic means have not so far succeeded.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH BDKz 2 ep.119 p.146-47, dated July 988; also in HGF 10, ep.28 p.395, dated 987, texts differ only in an et not in first sentence of MGH, quia for que, and ei for eius below.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>987-988