---
letter_id: "25012"
title: "A letter from and Peter of Aragon (1204, August 15)"
ititle: "a letter from and peter of aragon (1204, august 15)"
ltr_date: "1204, August 15"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-10"
url: "/letter/1311.html"
senders:
  - id: 156
    name: Marie of Montpellier
    iname: marie of montpellier
    type: woman
  - id: 21506
    name: Peter of Aragon
    iname: peter of aragon
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21298
    name: City of Montpellier
    iname: city of montpellier
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>The customs of the town of Montpellier granted by Peter of Aragon, king and lord of Montpellier, and his wife Marie. In the name of our lord Jesus Christ. These are the customs and freedoms of the town of Montpellier. There is only one lord of Montpellier who, with God’s favor, thus governs his people and honor: with the greatest zeal he takes pains to choose the bailiff of Montpellier from among his wiser and lawful men, only from men of this same town, with the shared counsel of upright men of the town. The bailiff should not be subject to another bailiff, or be held to respond or to seek his counsel, but he should render account to whomever the lord establishes. Moreover, all other bailiffs, even the one of Lattes and of Castronovo, must obey this bailiff and respond by law under his investigation. And with the bailiff he has established in his court courtiers, upright and wise men from the men of the same town. And to the bailiff and courtiers he grants that they only on his side, once all their other business has been set aside, adhere to the court and are daily in court and in office. And they promise to the lord in the presence of the people, by oath of the holy Gospels, that they should not receive gifts or presents, nor a man nor woman on their behalf, nor should it be promised to them in the future, nor should they promise to receive from any person who has a plea in court at any time, for as long as they will be in the court; and legally and faithfully in good faith they should carry out, investigate, and decide cases and pleas according to the custom of the court, and to everyone, both rich and poor, they should allow their right. <br>1. The lord holds as firm perpetually everything that the bailiff does. <br>2. When (people) come for cases, once they have taken oaths concerning calumny, the court should interrogate each party under oath about whether they have given or promised their money to the bailiff, judge or any courtier for the sake of that case. <br>3. For deliberations and judgments and for his court the lord has men outstanding in esteem and honesty who love justice and mercy, who do not, for entreaty or payment, gifts or services, friendship or enmity, deviate form the path of justice and mercy; and the lord especially carries out the concerns and business of Montpellier with his upright men of Montpellier. <br>4. The lord of Montpellier and his ancestors have loved, guarded and protected their men insofar as they could, and they have not sought occasions nor in any way caused them to lose their possessions or any movable or immovable property, unless by their own fault. And if the men of Montpellier grew or increased in goods or honor or any property, the lord was gladdened and helped them to increase and multiply it; and for that reason men increase their wealth with joy and display it openly without fear. And thus their wealth and property are returned to those to whom they are left in testaments, or they are donated, or they come through succession without any prohibition or impediment of the lord, such that the lord does not receive, remove or contradict anything thenceforth. <br>5. The bailiff and courtiers take this oath: “I, a man, swear to you, lord of Montpellier that, as long as I will hold the office of bailiff and administration of the town and court of Montpellier, I will keep and observe reason and justice for each and all persons, whoever and from wherever they may be or have been, who have or will have a case before me or in court, according to the customs and mores of the court which are now or will be fixed; and where mores and customs of the court are lacking, (I will observe justice) according to the rule of law, with all hate and grace, love, relation, affinity and connection fully excluded, according to what seems better to me and what my conscience deems better to me; and I will not receive through me or through another in any way, on any occasion, money or any thing or promise or any service from those who have or will have a case before me either in court on the occasion of that plea or from others in their name; and (I promise) not to receive judgment or anything in the name of judgment through me or through another before the end of a case or before it is resolved or satisfied for the overseer or advocate; and (I promise) to hold and receive with me goods and legal assessors according to what will seem better to me, and I will pronounce right judgments in all cases in which I am judge; and I will hold in confidence all things revealed to me in secret and in councils and in statements to be dictated to me. [Also, I swear to observe sentences brought or to be brought against homicides and others causing wounds, and I will send them to prosecution, and I will not come against them and will not permit anyone to come against them, and in cases and suits to be heard before me in court I will inviolably observe and uphold the new statute of Montpellier, beginning If by a Christian.] Without trick, art, or evil attempt, I will guard and preserve each and all these things in good faith for the trust of the lord of Montpellier and for the guardianship and observance of custom and law for all those litigating, such that in no way may I be absolved from this oath. So help me God and these four Gospels of God that I have touched.” <br>6. The lord of Montpellier does not have a Jewish bailiff among any of his servants. <br>7. In his court lawyers do not maintain cases except their own; and if they will have their own cases, a lawyer can be against them; there are no advocates unless the parties consent. And in his counsels, the lord has jurists when he wishes, but in cases he must always have a judge. <br>8. He utterly despises and punishes falsities. <br>9. Lenders and usurers who supply money for money are not received in testimony. <br>10. Concerning any disagreements, if proclamations thenceforth are not made to the lord or to the court, the lord and his court must not introduce their parties. <br>11. The men of Montpellier, whenever they wish, may sell all their goods and claim the profit for themselves and may depart wherever they will without impediment. But the lord must lend to them and their property and household [military] protection through all his land and with all his power; and everything that they wish to sell in which he will have permission, the lord himself or his bailiff must approve without opposition, save by his own council for himself. <br>12. The father who gives his daughter or daughters in marriage with heredity of property or title or bequeaths them with property or title, subsequently those daughters may not seek anything of paternal property unless the father has left it to them. And if the father has one son and one daughter that has not been given in marriage or made an heir, and the father dies intestate, the property of the intestate father returns to the son and daughter not married or made an heir, in equal portions. And if any married daughter made an heir by a father dies without testament and heirs, her property returns commonly to all surviving brothers, when the father is already deceased. And if a son or daughter who was not married or an heir died without testament and without children, the property of one would return to the other or his children. And if both died without testament and without children, their property would go to the married daughters or their heirs. But nonetheless any person can make testament concerning his property; and we say the same concerning the property of a mother. <br>13. Heirs and children of those who have given surety are not bound by the surety made by them after their death, unless a lawsuit with the one who made surety were contested, or a complaint concerning him were revealed to the court. <br>14. Whoever buys a house or foundation built by chance in Montpellier, gives thenceforth for the council a fifth to the lord; that is, if the seller will have one-hundred sous as the price, the buyer gives to the lord twenty-five [sic]sous; but the greatest release/remission thenceforth is made. <br>15. Concerning the pledges of men, the lord has six sous of one-hundred sous, for the council; but thenceforth release is made. But in pledges, whoever substitutes immovable property for a pledge, gives counsel. <br>16. If, concerning money or movable property, there will be a complaint in court because a debtor has refused to pay a debt, the convicted or condemned debtor pays the whole debt to the creditor, and in addition for justice he gives to the court as a portion of the debt approximately one-fourth. That is, if the creditor demands sixty sous, the debtor, who prior to the complaint refused to pay, gives for justice and is forced to give twenty sous; but thenceforth release is made. But he to whom the money is paid does not give anything to the court. And this statute exists so that no one retains the property of another. But if anyone has complained to the court about his debtor, when the debtor was not previously admonished to pay, and it was not clear to the debtor that he should satisfy his complaint, the debtor should not be forced to do justice. Likewise, if anyone displays the money owed to his creditor to be received by him, if it was understood by the creditor that he should receive it, and subsequently there will be a dispute in court over that money, thenceforth no justice should be given. 17. The court hears and determines with their dues [sumptibus] pleas made in court concerning offices and does not receive or exact anything thenceforth from the defendant or plaintiff. No one who litigates over any property in court gives pledges, unless it will be a knight who must give. <br>18. Wicked prohibition of bread, wine, hay, and all things are utterly forbidden in Montpellier, and all are permitted to profit in all things there and to legally carry out his trade whatever it may be without prohibition. <br>19. If something stolen elsewhere is found and seized by the court at Montpellier, if it is not owned by the men of Montpellier, a third belongs to the lord, and the foreign man who is lord of the property and proves that it is his recuperates two parts. But if the lord of the property or his messenger makes this known to the court before the court learns of it, he recuperates all of it. But for thefts that occur in Montpellier and to/by the men of Montpellier, the lord and his courtiers should not receive anything until satisfaction is made to the one who suffered the theft or injury, but they punish the thieves. <br>20. If anyone by chance buys in good faith from a thief or someone who is not the owner anything publicly for sale that is stolen, seized, or belongs to another, believing that it belongs to the seller, and if subsequently the true owner comes forth and proves that it belongs to him, after the buyer has taken an oath that he did not know the thing to be stolen or someone else’s, and he cannot produce the seller, the owner of the thing returns to the buyer only what the buyer has given for it and recuperates his own property. <br>21. If a wife has a husband or husband a wife, when they are caught in adultery with another, or if they will meet with audacious attempt after they are forbidden by the court to remain alone together in a house on account of ill repute, with the wife leading they will run together nude through the town and be whipped, and they should be punished in no other way. <br>22. Not all reproach and invective, which occur only verbally, are heard in court unless people alert the judge. Further, when someone in reproach calls another an evil servant, betrayer, traitor, proven thief, liar, or if he will call a married woman or widow a prostitute, unless he can prove these things, or if he will call a man or women a cudgeled one after justice has been done, or if he will call a Christian man or woman of Saracen or Jewish descent a Saracen or Jew, the court will judge these reproaches, which certainly deserve to be discharged with stripes and blows, according to the quality and dignity of the persons; and if anyone will say these things or any of them, he is responsible for injuries, and insofar as for the judgment or settlement he will offer the one who has suffered injury, he should be bound to offer only this and no more according to the justice of the court; but thenceforth release can be made by the will of the court. But if a low person will say these things to an upright man, he pays for justice through a beating to his body, if he has no property. <br>23. Homicides and other crimes that inflict injury of blood are punished according to the decision and judgment of the lord and of wise men. <br>24. Bundles and packs, which are not sold in Montpellier, do not yield or make anything for customs or tolls. <br>25. One legal, capable, and known witness is trusted regarding movable property up to one-hundred sous. <br>26. Two legal and suitable witnesses are trusted regarding any deed. <br>27. In Montpellier, only pure silver and gold vessels are made. <br>28. All offices and functions which are used and frequented thus in different places in Montpellier should always remain in their places and on no occasion should be moved to other places except only the custom office [weighing], which must be changed once and no more often, without loss to those who are now of the custom house and money-changing; but in neighbouring places all offices and functions may be enlarged and amplified.<br>29. The lord of Montpellier and anyone by his will should provide no escort or any security in the town of Montpellier to any man, knight, or cleric, or to anyone else or his property, who has violently attacked, wounded, killed, seized any man or woman of the town of Montpellier or his property, or who has inflicted physical assault through himself or through another, without the assent or will of the one who suffered the loss or injury, or his heir. And if in any way any offender will enter the town of Montpellier, those who have suffered loss or injury have and should have full power and license of taking vengeance by their own authority. And concerning any loss or injury inflicted on the offender or his abettors, in no way is the one who carried this out or his abettors bound to those who have suffered the loss or injury by their own fault, or to the lord or his court. And concerning these things the heirs of the offenders should be bound to them to the extent in which their successors can be obligated by law; but before the aforesaid vengeance or vindication, the wronged parties or their heirs must relate the complaint to the lord or court and declare the nature of the offence and offenders in the presence and testimony of witnesses or with a charter of a public notary so that the matter cannot be appealed. But if, for the sake of prayer only, a traveler will come to the doors of Blessed Mary, he should remain securely in the town for two days and two nights and should depart securely on the third day, unless he is one who seized, wounded, killed any man or woman or inflicted physical assault, or is or will have been an exile from Montpellier, in which case no security is given. <br>30. If any foreigner will deposit with anyone or entrust to anyone gold, silver, money or any other property, or will put his property in another’s company, or he himself works in money-changing, a workshop, or any office, all these things must be safe and secure in peace and war; or if anyone sends his son or grandson or anyone else for a duty, they will be safe and secure with their property in peace and war. <br>31. Each and all, whoever and from wherever they are or will be, in peace and in war may safely and securely come into the town of Montpellier with their property and dwell there, and thenceforth depart without opposition, and his property in peace and in war must be safe and secure for him even without him, unless by his own fault he is found guilty. Nonetheless, if the men of Montpellier have suffered loss or injury in the town or in the <em>castrum&nbsp;</em>he comes from and do not find exercise of justice and reason there, the court must allow those men of that place to depart safely and securely from the town with their property; and after their departure, those who suffered injury or loss are allowed to pledge and vindicate concerning the men of that place and their property in the place where failure of justice is found, or in the place where the offender carried out the offense. <br>32. If any man, knight, or cleric, or any other foreigner, thenceforth becomes a debtor of any man of Montpellier, and complaint is brought forth to the court concerning payment, unless he satisfies it, the creditor is allowed by his own authority to force and pledge him in his person and his property concerning payment of his debt; in the name of that enforcement or pledge the creditor or his abettors in no way are obliged to answer to the lord or court or even to the one who has been forced and pledged. However, clerics are not forced in their persons, but in property, except by right and jurisdiction for the bishop of Maguelone for clerics of his episcopate and their property. <br>33. If men from the power and justice of the county of Melgor will contract or commit anything in the town of Montpellier, they must respond there if they are found there; and in the same way the men of Montpellier are under the jurisdiction of the county of Melgor. And if it is contracted or committed outside the town, the agent follows the jurisdiction of the matter here and there. But if failure of justice is found, then the one who has suffered injury or loss can pledge with proclamation made as stated above, or the court may force him. <br>34. If any private or foreign criminal or debtor flees from the town of Montpellier, the creditor or anyone in his name may seize and retain him and guard him with iron shackles until he makes satisfaction. And if anyone flees without the will of the creditors, the lord must not make or suffer him to return without the will of the creditors; the lord must not secure him with property or without property until he satisfies his creditors. And all his property and means must be distributed by measure of pound to his creditors, except the rights of action granted by the law; and no charter, privilege, and no security made, obtained or to be obtained must in any degree prejudice these things. <br>35. Those who are debtors by not paying must be handed over to Christian creditors with the understanding that they not be taken away from this town. Which creditors are not forced in any way to accuse them, unless they do not have the wherewithal to live, in which case recovery will be given by the judgment of the court. Nonetheless, if by any accidental chance, they became insolvent without their fault, the court must decide whether they should be handed over to creditors. <br>36. But if any debtors have goods and do not pay following a case decided, within two months, in good faith and without any wicked contrivance, by the court’s authority, their goods must be taken from those who have been compelled, however not by the court; and all of their money should go for payment for the calculated amount of the debt to all creditors, except for privileges of actions granted by law; and no one except the debtor and his heirs will be bound by the recovery of things taken. <br>37. If anyone has a weight on a wall on the lower part, he may freely build on the upper part and obscure its threshold, while nonetheless he should render for calculated amounts expenses of the upper part of the wall; and no one may construct a window on the wall beneath roof tiles; and if he will do this, it will be closed off unless the strength of an agreement reclaims it. <br>38. If a woman gives surety for any man or woman, she is bound in those cases in which the laws allow. For according to the laws, interposition, i.e. becoming surety is valid for a woman (in the following cases): by ignorance of the creditor, by knowledge of the one binding him/herself, by granting, by reckoning of one’s own situation, by renunciation, by release of pledge or promise, by second obligation after two years, in the presence of three witnesses by means of advance confession, by freedom, dowry, and if she may exercise an office and she may intercede for its sake, or by will of her husband, she may be efficaciously obliged. <br>39. Concerning immovable property, although a deception may exceed half of a just price, the sale is not rescinded; but concerning movable property, if there is a deception beyond half the price, it should be fully rescinded or the price should be adjusted. <br>40. If a pledge will be obliged, it should not be forced to redeem unless it were a contract, although a smaller pledge is valid for a debt. It cannot be retained for another debt; but if three years have passed, a creditor may, by the court’s mandate, seize immovable property and satisfy himself unless a debtor who has been warned wants to pay, or unless he opposes the agreement; and for the recovery of the property seized the debtor and his heirs are bound and no other; but if one year has passed, a creditor may seize movable collateral unless the debtor who has been warned pays. <br>41. Whoever is prior in a sale, pledge, or recompense, with the permission of the lord to whom it belongs, he is owner, saving privileges of actions granted by the law. <br>42. If anyone will confess that he owes with the creditor or his proctor present, he may describe the case or not, and it is valid outside of court; and if there is doubt concerning the management, it may be trusted by oath of the precise agent and proctor only, without witnesses; and the same thing should be observed for all things in all confessions made outside of court, except for crimes. <br>43. Concerning a judgment delivered, it may be appealed within a legitimate time to the lord or to whomever the lord has established for this; and the lord himself or whoever he has established for this must investigate diligently if in his power there is any lawyer who will give counsel to any of the parties or will be present in court; and with that lawyer he must hear and conclude the case. If, however, he finds none, he may call outside judges, and at his own expense, with the least he can, decide the case; and if the appellant will obtain it, he will provide no expenses, but the loser should provide the least that he can by the court; the court may not demand these unless the case of appeal is terminated. <br>44. If, while a suit is pending, any of those litigating will say that he is grieved or injured or diminished in his right, he may complain to the lord about each and all courtiers; and the lord himself, before another judge, without delay and without expense of those litigating, must cause him to be heard and determine the matter. <br>45. If anyone from the whole dominion and territory of Montpellier will give clearly deceitful counsel to the lord of Montpellier, and as a result of that counsel or its occurrence, loss or insult occurs to another, that wicked provider of counsel is bound to restore everything to the one who has suffered the loss or injury, and moreover he is at the mercy of the lord; and the lord must not conceal him, but he is bound to reveal without delay the wicked counsel and counselor to the one who has suffered loss and injury. 46. All privileges and documents contrary to reason given and to be given to Jews and Christians are and must always be void and of no importance. <br>47. Every inhabitant of Montpellier, for his home or land, whatever its value may be, small or great, must put aside tributes and crop dues; and the bailiff of Montpellier must approve that house or property for him, saving his counsel, if the lord will have permission there. But any canon of the church of Maguelone, having a house in Montpellier worth five-hundred sous, should set aside crop dues and tribute; and all the monks of the Cistercian order, or their men, having or not having a home, should set aside tributes and crop dues in all the dominion of Montpellier. <br>48. If anyone who should be bound by the lord of Montpellier or his vassals will cease to make a payment for his house or any office of his, even for the longest time, is not in danger of attack, but only a due fine is to be paid. <br>49. Any inhabitant of Montpellier is not bound to plead in the court of Lattes or in the court of Castronovo concerning movable property or concerning personal actions and concerning the converse. 50. In the rivers and meadows, all are permitted for their or public work to claim a bank and wash and dry clothes; no one may prohibit this on account of another acquisition thenceforth made or on account of long use. <br>51. The fishery is public. <br>52. Every testament and every last will among children or relatives or foreigners in writing or unwritten should be done in the presence of three suitable witnesses summoned or not summoned, with formality observed or omitted. It is valid and proved sufficiently by those three witnesses; and if before proclamation one will die or be absent, the two witnesses may sufficiently prove that the third was present.<br>53. A married son or daughter married by the father’s will is understood to be released.<br>54. A daughter married may not produce a testament or last will without the counsel of her father or mother, or if they are lacking, of her relatives; and if she make a gift to her husband or to another on account of her husband, or the testament is without the counsel of her father or mother or relatives, it should be considered of no effect, whether she is oldest or youngest in birth. But these things are understood about a daughter who is without a child; for if she has a child, she is able to make testament and to give according to her will without counsel of her parents or relatives. However, with parents or relatives present or absent, if it stands with them that they wished not to beinvolved, she may without distinction bestow or leave whatever she wishes to her husband. <br>55. Every testament made before three witnesses without establishment of an heir is valid, and a parent may leave whatever he wishes to children; and if little be left, the children may not complain; but in all things and through all things, without question of due support and its supply of goods, the children must obey the will of parents and be content with their bequests. <br>56. In substitutions, the will of the deceased must be observed in the rest, in every place and time, without benefit of the law of Falcidia,1. for young adults or those who have become older.<br>57. If testament or last will is made elsewhere by a father or by someone from the outside, it must be legitimately proved by seven or five witnesses, not by the required seals and above-written things. <br>58. If anyone will die intestate, his property must belong to his children or to his relatives if children are lacking; and if he will have a son married and entitled heir or a daughter married by the father, all his property entirely must belong to the other children. If he does not have others, the married ones may succeed; but the paternal property must be of the nearest of the paternal line; likewise the maternal property must be the nearest of the maternal line, with laws in this region nonetheless observed. <br>59. If any testator leaves his office for remedy of his soul, it may be sold by the court’s counsel, if that office is obliged to the lord of Montpellier; and its price will be given in the way the testator arranged; but the relatives of the testator must be informed concerning this matter, and if they wish to give such a price, in good faith and without wicked contrivance or opposition, as if external, they may have it before all other relatives. <br>60. The lord of Montpellier does not have nor has ever had over the inhabitants of Montpellier present or future power of undue tribute, exaction, forced loan, or any forced exaction. <br>61. The lord of Montpellier or his bailiff may by no means give or sell or concede counsel or permission of any thing that is held from him, unless sale or transfer of that thing is contracted; and all who hold or will hold any property from the lord of Montpellier must observe the same thing; and if anything is done against this, it must be rescinded and it cannot obtain any force. <br>62. Judicial duel or ordeal by hot iron or boiling water or other things rejected by canons or laws are in no way valid in the court of Montpellier, unless each party agrees. <br>63. Any bailiff or any courtier of Montpellier who is obliged by the lord of Montpellier must not buy any office for himself or for another for as long as he will be in the office of bailiff, nor must he do anything to defraud these things. <br>64. Unknown witnesses must not be received or heard concerning deeds that occur or will occur in Montpellier, unless their life may be proved blameless and temperate by someone who comes forth. But concerning deeds done on the outside they must be received, although what is said may not be proved. Similarly, they must be received up to a sum of one-hundred sous only, although their life may not be proved blameless and temperate. <br>65. Domestic thefts either of plunder or domestic injury are punished by lords or masters, such that they are not obliged to report to the court; nor may the punished be heard in court about the punishment. Moreover, we understand domestics as a wife, servants, freemen, merchants, sons and grandsons, students, scholars, auditors, and all men and women who are in a household. <br>66. In donations, bequests, things left, exchanges, dowries or donations for weddings, pledges obliged in the name of dowry for a woman or her husband, of those properties that are held or will be held by the lord of Montpellier or by his vassals in the appurtenances of Montpellier, the lord and his vassals must hold or receive no permission or counsel; and if he who transfers will burden the one receiving for certain money to be given, if the one receiving to whom the transferer needs to relinquish his goods is in the category of children, parents, brothers or nephews/grandsons, or even a foreigner who is established as heir, or if for salvation of his soul he commands to give the receiver certain money, he who must give money will give no counsel or permission in the aforesaid cases. However, in other cases he will give permission, insofar as a quantity of money is distributed. <br>67. If money is given as a loan to those gambling, the creditor may have no action nor thenceforth be heard against the receiver or against the one giving surety; but if he has a pledge, thenceforth he has retention. <br>68. There is no petition for interest of money for money, nor must it be heard, unless it is promised by oath or faith pledged; and this is common law so that among Christians and Jews an oath or faith pledged may be observed for interest to be given. <br>69. The court should not judge danger of attack or penalty of promises unless it is confirmed by oath or faith pledged. <br>70. A contract deed should not be given a space of twenty days, but the day following a complaint made or following the judge’s knowledge, it must have response. <br>71. Delays of four months are not granted to condemned criminals, but they should be given by the judge’s decision. <br>72. Debtors and those giving surety are assembled before and after according to the judgment of the one demanding. <br>73. Those who give surety are forced to pay without concession of the letter of the blessed Adrian. <br>74. Donation among the living that lacks legitimate documents is valid forever. <br>75. Through naming, all contracts flourish in which the laws seek written proof of letters. <br>76. Definitive sentence is made valid by municipal law, even if it will be recited without documents. <br>77. Summons of parties should be done by decision of the judge without formal number of days and without documents. <br>78. Extensions of time should not be observed, but by the good and fair decision of the judge they may be shortened. <br>79. The judge must question witnesses but not suggest anything to them. <br>80. Disputes are not deferred by the absence of an advocate. <br>81. No one should receive but half a share of income from houses of men not dwelling here; and this should only be received for the work of the community of Montpellier. <br>82. The lord or caretaker of a house or his messenger for him, may expel a tenant from the house for the own residence of the lord or caretaker, unless a contract should counter this; and if he will not pay the rent, he may evict him from the house by his own authority and close up the house, and keep everything of the tenant’s that he finds within for his own rent. <br>83. The collector must not lend tribute or crop dues except for that part of the chattel/funds that belong to him, or for that part of profit already acquired that then belongs to him. <br>84. Any lord of Montpellier or anyone for him must in no way compel a widow or any woman to contract marriage; nor in any way without the will of the woman and her friends should he thenceforth insert himself. <br>85. But a girl, who has never had a husband, may not marry without the counsel of her parents or kinsmen or guardians; and whoever marries her without the counsel of the abovesaid persons will meet the lord’s punishment in his person and his property. <br>86. Equality must be observed in sesters and emina2 and in other measurements, and there must not be less or more of a sester or emina of salt or bran or wheat; and in marks and ounces and pounds and in other weights, in reeds and alderwood, and in iron of a hundred weight, equality must be observed according to what was observed in ancient times; and likewise in purity of gold and silver; and for the management of these, two upright men should be established, who twice each year should inspect all these things. <br>87. For tributes retained or to be retained from out of the region, no punishment and no danger of attack should be imposed; but they should be restored by lot. But if they are a requirement that has been held back by an inhabitant of this town, he should satisfy thenceforth twofold. <br>88. The lord of Montpellier has an army and cavalry for the men present and future of the same town, insofar as for misdeeds and injuries inflicted on the men, or the dominion or land of the town, concerning which the wrongdoer might refuse to make account. The men make up this cavalry according to the ancient and usual way of Montpellier. <br>89. The lord of Montpellier does not receive a travel toll in all the land of Montpellier. <br>90. Pacts and agreements and absolutions that girls make to their father and mother or only to the father, or to the mother after the father’s death, concerning their property or that of their parents at the time when they give them in marriage, even if they are younger than 25 years, will be valid forever, when they are strengthened by oath. But in all other cases concerning men and women, the age of 25 years should be observed, as the law is written. <br>91. The lord of Montpellier on no occasion in any way must seize or have seized any inhabitant present or future of Montpellier; he should not deny him the jurisdiction or occupy or impede in any respect his property, whoever should wish to do justice or make account for him; but in all these things the judicial order must be observed. But exiles are excluded from this. <br>92. A witness, who was of good reputation when a testament was made or business contracted, although subsequently he became infamous, nonetheless concerning that testament or business he should be entrusted as a good and legal witness. <br>93. A foreign man, who in the town of Montpellier takes a wife and remains there, will be free for a year and a day from cavalry, army, and vigil. <br>94. It is established that upright and legal men of Montpellier, when they swear [they should be chosen who must give judgment when swearing] on the goods and riches of individuals, they should both define and make clear how much of each thing to give and expend for work dedicated to construction of walls; and these may diminish or increase for each man according to what will seem appropriate to them in good faith, according to the poverty, scarcity or wealth of each patrimony. And these should be chosen with swearing by fourteen (men), namely by two from each district; the fourteen should swear to choose in good faith. And all of these things are annual so that no one should remain there (i.e. in that office) except one year, and subsequently others should be replaced in the same way. And the abovesaid, whom the said fourteen choose, must receive the money pertaining to construction of walls and spend it for construction, as will seem best to them. <br>95. Dowries or inheritances, either on account of nuptial gifts or betrothal generosities do not bear equal value; but they should be valid according to the will of those conferring, from each party or one only. <br>96. There should be no monopoly, or rasza or trasza.3 <br>97. In bake-houses and mills quantity/measure should be preserved by the judgment of good men.&nbsp;<br>98. And if anyone will seal by his own will, he should give for the seal [sigillo] only six pennies and for another seal four pennies and no more; and certainly an upright and lawful man of this town and no other should hold the bulla and seal; and he should be held by oath as bound to all of this town. <br>99. A foreign debtor or wrongdoer may be retained by a creditor who has suffered loss or injury, when (the debtor) is suspected of flight when he has refused to come to court; and if, when he has been brought to court, no detainer can attend, the detained may not complain about the detainer or his assistants, if by oath of calumny the detainer has excused himself; but the men and clerics of the country of Melgorius are exceptions to this, according to what was said. <br>100. Buying and selling is not valid without agreement or without payment of price, specific or universal, or without transfer of property. <br>101. When pledges have been given, one who rescinds loses them; the recipient rescinding restores them twofold. <br>102. Notaries present and future, in no place or time, for no reason or occasion, are forced to declare to a lord, the court, or anyone, what they note or write or what is said to them in secret, except for the sake of presenting testimony. <br>103. In no butcher shop may be sold flesh (nor flesh of goat, male or female) of a dead animal or sick or leprous in place of a healthy one, or of a sheep that while living could not chew; nor may anyone sell meat of a kid or male sheep in place of a castrated ram, nor meat of a sow in place of meat of a pig. If nonetheless anyone will do this, he should restore the price of the meat twofold. But nonetheless no one may sell within the town the meat of a dead or sick or unborn animal; nor in the shop of a butcher may be sold the meat of a sheep or ram or lambs or pig or ox or sow or cow. <br>104. For new or old walls, if at any time a gateways will be made, nothing thenceforth must be given to the lord. <br>105. If any foreigner for the sake of any office will be another’s man and will come to Montpellier to dwell, he is thenceforth free from that service; nonetheless while he holds the office, for which he was his man, he should yield to the lord. <br>106. The lord of Montpellier and his bailiff in no way should sell decisions of his court. <br>107. If anyone, for the sake of producing witnesses, defers a case for nine months, according to what the law requires he must declare in secret the names of witnesses to the courtiers, and the names of witnesses must be rendered in the deeds of the court, and if he will produce none of them on the appointed day, thenceforth all summoning of witnesses should be denied him. <br>108. The bailiff of Montpellier receives sentences of the court and permission only; and the lord should have no bailiff involved in any of his renderings of accounts in Montpellier, unless he is from the men of that town. <br>109. No foreign man may dye any wool clothing in Montpellier in red or in any color; no foreigner should sell any clothing to measure (tailored) in this town except those he will have worn on his neck through the town. <br>110. No white wool cloth may be dyed in rubia so that it remains red, unless it is only in red berry. <br>111. No one may exact or receive for his own property, and nothing may be exacted or received by a wife or her family in the name of a customs duty (tax on foreign items) and the inhabitants present and future of Montpellier are not bound in any way to pay customs duty. <br>112. Confessions, testimonies, transactions and all other things brought forth before witnesses are thenceforth valid as if they were enacted in court. <br>113. No one should be forced unwillingly to receive or lodge guests. <br>114. If any inhabitant of Montpellier or intestate foreigner will die there, and no kinsman to whom his property belongs by law will appear there, those goods must be deposited with good and secure men and must be protected by them for a year and a day so that if within that time anyone comes to whom they belong, they should be returned to him, yet without tax, who also subsequently may be bound to return to whomever the law will wish. <br>115. If anyone is condemned for injury, he should only render to the court for justice, and no more, as much as he is condemned to correct for the sentence or fine for the one who suffered the injury; but thenceforth release may be made according to the will of the court. <br>116. Once interest is furnished for principal, thenceforth interest in no way should increase, for any long duration of time; and if promise is made by oath or faith pledged, it should not be judged further against Jews or Christians because these things are thus reckoned by regulation. <br>117. Each and all who have been or will be established to exact and receive the lord’s revenues must swear to faithfully exact and receive them, and they should not receive any more than what is owed, nor should they receive services for the occasion of that duty. <br>118. Immovable property that is transferred to a husband as dowry, if the wife dies prematurely, the husband must use and hold them for all his life unless he will claim an agreement to the contrary. <br>119. A bailiff, under-bailiff, judge, and sheriff must remain in court for only one year, and subsequently within two years none of them should be restored to the court. <br>120. It has been established that twelve upright and lawful men of Montpellier already elected to counsel the community of Montpellier must swear that in good faith they will consult with whomever the lord will establish in his place on this earth; and he should be bound to seek the counsel of the said twelve and remain in their counsel concerning everything that regards the community of Montpellier and the land of Montpellier. Concerning those twelve aforesaid men only one should be placed from any household. The twelve should only remain in that administration for one year. At the end of the year the same twelve should choose another twelve for this same thing, with oath taken that they will choose them in good faith. The newly elected must swear the same thing for everything; and with the counsel of those twelve whoever acts in place of the lord in this land should choose the bailiff of the court when the current lord will not be in this land. <br>121. Moreover, these customs should take effect to this extent in future affairs. In past affairs, they should have no force except only those that are ancient, which were firm in the past. <br>122. Moreover, the lord of Montpellier, by sworn oath must promise that he will uphold justice and reason, and he will have it upheld with each and all who will litigate or should litigate in his court, both poor and rich, according to the mores and customs inserted here, or if these are lacking, according to the discipline of the law. And the bailiff and under-bailiff, judge, sherrif, notary, and all courtiers of the court present and future must swear the same thing and more for everything, as is contained in the abovesaid oath. And all advocates present and future, except lawyers, must swear that in good faith, according to what will seem best to them, they will serve the parties for whom by the duty of advocacy they consult and defend, and that they will not accept money or any other thing or promise except from the party whom they will represent in a suit. And all counselors whom the court will wish to assume, excepting those who have already sworn, must swear the same thing that the said judge and bailiff, under-bailiff, judge, and sheriff swore. And anyone must remain in court for only a year, as was said. I, Peter, by God’s grace king of Aragon, count of Barcelona and lord of Montpellier, having seen, heard, and diligently examined each and all the above-said things, and having carried out the fullest deliberation on them, with the counsel obtained of many upright men, knowing and understanding that each and all the abovesaid pertain for my use and that of the whole community of Montpellier, with free will and by my own pure decision, approve, establish, confirm, and determine each and all of the abovesaid things as valid forever for all the men of Montpellier present and future, through me and all my successors, the lords of Montpellier. And I promise and agree to all the community of Montpellier that I will uphold, observe and at no time violate each and all the abovesaid things, and I will cause all of them to be upheld forever nor will allow them to be violated by anyone. And I wish and establish that the court of Montpellier should judge according to the aforesaid customs, and should make use of them inviolably forever, and when they are lacking, according to the written law. But from each and all of the abovesaid things I except all those whom I have made exiles from Montpellier and from all the land that was of G. lord of Montpellier, late son of Mathilda, duchess, because being aware of their guilt, when the land of Montpellier came to me, I swore at the request of the people of Montpellier that never would they return to Montpellier and the aforesaid land. I command and order, moreover, that the queen my wife should approve and confirm each and all the aforesaid things in the same way, with me or without me, at the admonition of the people of Montpellier, and all men of Montpellier likewise should confirm by swearing that they will observe all these things. I promise and confirm with sure knowledge that I will observe and on no occasion or for any reason will violate each and all of the abovesaid things, for me and for my successors, in my good faith and under the oath that I made, touching the sacrosanct Gospels, in the house of the militia, concerning the mores and customs of Montpellier to be approved and upheld, in the time when the land of Montpellier came to me. Further, for greater security of all these things, I command that this charter and all things thenceforth conveyed be strengthened by the protection of my leaden seal. All these things were enacted and approved in the church of Blessed Mary of the Tablets, where specifically for this reason nearly the whole populace of Montpellier met for common discussion, in the year of the Lord’s incarnation 1204 in the month of August, on the day of the Assumption of holy Mary in the presence and testimony of G., provost of Maguelone, Gaucelm the canon, Assallitus of Goza, G. of Durfort, Bernardino, Anselm of Massilia, P. of Bisanchas, P. Berengar, G. of Rabastene, P. Guiraudus, J. of Lattes, Berengar of Conques, W. of Conques, P. of Porta, W. Peter, B. Church, P. Lobet, etc. [About forty names follow, not listed in the published text], G. Ramon notary, Jacob Laurence notary, and many others with whom nearly the whole church was full, and B. of Porta, public notary of the court of Montpellier, who wrote this. Likewise, I, Marie, queen of Aragon, countess of Barcelona, and lady of Montpellier, wife of said lord P. king of Aragon and daughter of the late G. lord of Montpellier, having seen, heard, and diligently examined each and all of the abovesaid things, and having carried out fullest deliberation on them, with counsel obtained of many upright men, knowing and understanding that each and all of the abovesaid things pertain to my use and that of the whole community of Montpellier, with free will and purely by my own decision, and specifically by the command of my said husband the lord king, approve, establish, confirm, and determine each and all of the abovesaid things as valid forever for all the men of Montpellier present and future, through me and all my successors, the lords of Montpellier. And I promise and agree to all the community of Montpellier that I will uphold, observe and at no time violate each and all the abovesaid things, and I will cause all of them to be upheld forever nor will allow them to be violated by anyone. And I wish and establish that my court of Montpellier should judge according to the aforesaid customs, and should make use of them inviolably forever, and when they are lacking, according to the written law. But from each and all of the abovesaid things I except all those whom I have made exiles from Montpellier and from all my land that was of lord G. of Montpellier, my father, because being aware of their guilt, when the land of my father came to me, I swore at the request of the people of Montpellier that never would they return to Montpellier and to my land. I promise and confirm with sure knowledge that I will observe and on no occasion or for any reason will violate each and all of the abovesaid things, for me and for my successors, in my good faith and under the oath that I made, touching the sacrosanct Gospels, in the house of the militia, concerning the mores and customs of Montpellier to be approved and upheld, in the time when my paternal inheritance came to me. These things were enacted and approved by the lady queen in the chamber of the castle of Montpellier, in the year and month as above, fifth kalends of September. Witnesses are: G. provost of Maguelone, P. of Bisanchas, P. of Porta, P. of Conques, W. his son, Berengar of Conques, R. Atbrand, P. Lobet, R. Benedict, B. Church, P. Lucian, Deodat Bocados, etc, etc. [About sixty names of witnesses follow, and many others who signed at the foot of the swearing of king Peter].4</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Consuetudines villae Montispessulani a Petro Aragonum rege, domino Montispessulani, et a Maria ejus uxore concessae.
In nomine Domini nostri Jhesu Xpisti. Tales sunt consuetudines et libertates ville Montispessulani.— Unus solus est dominus Montispessulani qui sic suum, Deo favente, regit populum et honorem : Summo studio dat operam ut de sapientioribus et legalibus hominibus suis faciat bajulum Montispessulani, de hominibus tantum ejusdem ville, comunicato consilio proborum hominum ipsius ville. Qui bajulus nulli alio bajulo subiciatur, vel respondere, vel ejus consilium requirere in aliquo teneatur, sed computum debeat reddere illi quem dominus statuerit. Cui etiam bajulo omnes bajuli alii, et etiam ille de Latis et de Castronovo, hobedire, et sub ejus examine de jure respondere debent. — Et cum bajulo, in curia sua statuit curiales, probos viros et sapientes, de hominibus ejusdem ville. Et bajulo et curialibus donat tantum de suo quod ipsi, postpositis universis aliis negociis suis, adherent curie et sunt cotidie in curia et justicia. Et promissionem faciunt domino, coram populo, per sacramentum sanctorum Evangelorum, quod dona vel munera non accipiant ipsi, nec homo neque femina per eos, nec in antea spondeatur ipsis, nec ipsi spondeant se accepturos ab aliqua persona que placitum in curia habeat aliquo tempore, quamdiu in curia steterint; et quod legaliter et fideliter, per bonam fidem, secundum usum curie tractent et examinent et diffiniant lites et placita, et unicuique velint jus suum, tam pauperi quam diviti.
1.	Hoc totum vero quod bajulus facit, dominus pro firmo habet in perpetuum.
2.	Cum conveniunt ad placita, factis sacramentis de calumpnia, curia interrogat utramque partem per sacramentum, si bajulo vel judici vel alicui curialium, propter illud placitum, suam dedit vel promisit peccuniam.
3.	In consiliis et judiciis et in curia sua dominus habet viros laude et honestate preclaros qui justiciam amant et misericordiam, qui, prece vel precio, donis vel muneribus, amicicia vel inimicicia, non deviant a semita justicie et misericordie: et curas et negocia Montispessulani dominus facit precipue cum suis probis hominibus Montispessulani.
4.	Dominus Montispessulani et antecessores sui amaverunt homines suos et custodierunt, et salvaverunt in quantum potuerunt, et non quesierunt occasiones, neque aliquo modo fecerunt ut suos perderent possessioncs vel res aliquas mobiles vel immobiles, nisi propria culpa. Et si creverunt vel multiplicaverunt homines Montispessulani in avero vel honore, vel aliquibus rebus, letatus est dominus et adjuvit eos crescere et multiplicare; et ideo cum gaudio homines suas pandunt divicias, et palam ostendunt sine timore. Et ita divicie et possessiones eorum revertuntur illis quibus relinquuntur intestamentis, vel donantur, vel per successionem eveniunt, sine omni defensione et impedimento domini, ita quod dominus aliquid inde non accipit, neque aufert, neque contradicit.
5.	Bajulus et curiales faciunt tale sacramentum: — “ Ego homo juro tibi domino Montispessulani quod, quamdiu bailiam et amministrationem ville et curio Montispessulani tennero, rationem et justiciam tenebo et observabo omnibus et singulis personis, quecumque et undecumque sint vel fuerint, que causam habent vel habebunt coram me vel in curia, secundum consuetudines et mores curie qui modo certi sunt vel erunt; et, ubi mores et consuetudines curie deficient, secundum juris ordinem, omni odio ct gratia, et dilectione, et parentela, et affinitate, et vicinitate penitus exclusis, secundum quod melius mihi visum fuerit, et conscientia mea mihi melius dictaverit; et quod neque per me vel per alium, ullo modo, ulla occasione, peccuniam vel aliam rem seu promissionem, vel aliquod servitium accipiam ab hiis qui causam habent vel habituri sunt coram me vel in curia, occasione illius placiti, vel ab aliis nomine eorum; et quod justiciam nec aliquid nomine justicie non accipiam, per me vel per alium, ante finem cause aut antequam solutum sit vel satisfactum creditori vel actori; et quod habebo vel accipiam mecum bonos et legatos assessores, secundum quod melius mihi visum fuerit, et recta judicia pronunciabo in omnibus causis in quibus judex fuero; et celabo omnia ea que in secreto et in consiliis et in dictanda sentencia seorsum mihi revelabuntur. [Item juro quod sentencias latas et ferendas contra homicidas et alios vulnera facientes observabo, et exsecutioni mandabo, et contra illas non veniam, nec aliquem venire permittam, et quod in causis et litibus coram me in curia ventilandis statutum novum Montispessulani, incipiens: Si per Xpistianum, tenebo et inviolabiliter observabo '''.] Hec omnia et singula sine dolo et arte et malo ingenio, bona fide custodiam et servabo ad fidelitatem domini Montispessulani, et ad custodiam et observationem consuetudinis et juris omnium litigantium, ita quod ab isto Sacramento nullatenus possim absolvi. Sic Deus me adjuvet et hec sancta Dei Evangelia a me tacta. »
6.	Bajulum judeum non habet dominus Montispessulani in aliquibus redditibus suis.
7.	In curia sua legiste non manutenent causas, nisi suas proprias; et si causas proprias habuerint, contra eos poterit esse legista; neque sunt advocati, nisi partes consentiant. Et in consiliis dominus habet, quando voluerit, jurisperitos; sed in causis semper debet habere judicem.
8.	Falsitates omnino respuit et punit.
9.	Renovarii sen usurarii, qui denarios pro denariis accomodant, non recipiuntur in testimonio.
10.  De aliquibus discordiis, si proclamationes inde non fiunt domino vel curie, non debet dominus vel ejus curia interponere partes suas.
11. Homines Montispessulani, quocienscumque voluerint, universa bona sua vendere, et precium secum deferre possunt, et abire ubicumque voluerint, sine impedimento. Dominus vero debet eis et rebus suis et familie sue ducatum prestare per totam terram suam et per totum posse suum; et omnia que vendere illi voluerint, in quibus habebit laudimium, debet ipse dominus vel ejus bajulus sine contrarietate laudare, salvo sibi suo consilio.
12.  Pater qui maritat filiam vel filias suas cum hereditate averi vel honoris, vel hereditat eas cum avero vel honore, postea non possunt ille filie aliquid petere in bonis paternis, nisi eis pater dimiserit. Et si pater habet magis unum filium et unam filiam, que non sit heredata vel maritata, et pater moritur intestatus, bona patris intestati revertuntur filio et filie non maritatis vel heredatis, equis portionibus. Et si moritur aliqua de maritatis filiabus et heredatis a patre sine gadio et heredibus, bona ejus revertuntur communiter omnibus fratribus superstitibus, patre jam mortuo. Et si filius vel filia, que non fuerit maritata vel heredata, moriebantur sine gadio et sine liberis, bona unius revertantur alteri vel ejus liberis. Et si ambo moriebantur sine gadio et sine liberis, bona eorum revertuntur filiabus maritatis vel heredibus earum. Sed tamen unaqueque persona potest facere gadium de suo jure; et eodem modo dicimus de bonis matris.
13.  Heredes seu filii fidejussorum non tenentur de fidejussione ab eis facta post mortem eorum, nisi lis cum eo qui fidejussit fuit contestata, vel de eo querimonia curie exposita.
14.	Quicumque comparat domum vel solum forte inhedificatum in Montepessulano, dat inde pro consilio quintam domino, hoc est, si venditor habuerit de precio C. solidos, dat emptor domino xxv. (sic) solidos; sed maxima inde fit remissio.
15.	De pignoribus honorum habet dominus de c. solidis vi. solidos, pro consilio; sed fit inde remissio. Sed in pignoribus, ille qui rem inmobilem pignori supponit, dat consilium.
16.	Si de peccunia seu re mobili clamor fuerit in curia eo quod debitor nolit solvere debitum, debitor convictus vel condempnatus solvit creditori totum debitum, et insuper pro justicia dat curie, pro quantitate debiti, quasi quartam. Hoc est, si creditor consequatur LX. solidos, debitor, qui ante clamorem noluit solvere, dat pro justicia et cogitur dare xx. solidos; sed fit inde remissio. Sed ille cui persolvitur peccunia , non dat aliquid curie. Et hoc est statutum ideo ut aliquis non retineat jus alterius. Sed si quis querimoniam fecerit curie de debitore suo, non commonito prius debitore ut solvat, et per debitorem non steterit quominus satisfaciat ejus querele, justiciain dare debitor non cogetur. Similiter, si quis peccuniam debitam suo creditori ostendet ab eo accipiendam, si per creditorem steterit quominus eam accipiat, et postea pro ea peccunia clamor fuerit in curia, nulla inde dari debet justicia.
17.	Placita que fiunt in curia de honoribus, curia audit et diffinit suis sumptibus, et aliquid inde a  reo vel ab actore non percipit vel exigit; nec aliquis qui litiget de aliqua re in curia dat pignora, nisi fuerit miles qui dare debet.
18.	Iniqua interdicta panis et vini et feni et omnium rerum a Montepessulano omnino excluduntur, et omnibus passim ibi proficere licet, et officium suum exercere legaliter, quodcumque sit, sine interdictione.
19.	Si res alibi furata apud Montempessulanum inventa est et a curia capta, si de hominibus Monpessulani non fuerit, tercia pars est domini, et duas partes recuperat extraneus homo dominus rei qui rem suam probat. Sed si ipse dominus rei vel ejus nuncius hoc ostendit curie antequam sciat curia, totum recuperat in integrum. Sed in furtis que fiunt in Montepessulano et hominibus Montispessulani, aliquid dominus vel ejus curiales, donec satisfactum sit furtum vel injuriam passo, non accipiunt, sed personas furum puniunt.
20.	Si quis forte a fure vel a non domino rem aliquam furatam, vel raptam, vel alienam, publice venalem bona fide, putans esse illius [qui vendit], emerit, si postea verus dominus veniens rem esse suam probaverit, facto Sacramento ab emptore quod nescivisset furtivam vel alienam esse, et non possit venditorem exhibere, dominus rei restituit emptori solum quod in ea emptor dedit, et rem suam recuperat.
21.	Si mulier virum habens, vel vir uxorem, cum aliquo vel aliqua capti in adulterio fuerint, vel, postquam eis interdicitur a curia ne insimul soli in domo maneant propter malam famam, si ausu temerario contravenerint, mulier precedens, ambo nudi, currunt per villam et fustigantur, et in alio non condempnantur. 
22.	Non omnia convitia et contumelie, que verbis solummodo fiunt, audiuntur in curia, nisi persone monuerint judicem. Preter, cum quis ad contumeliam vocat aliquem malservum, vel proditorem, vel traditorem, vel furem probatum, vel perjurum, vel si uxoratam vel viduam vocaverit meretricem, nisi ea probare poterit, vel si fustigatum vel fustigatam, post justiciam factam, appellaverit, vel si aliquem Xpistianum vel Xpistianam , de progenie Sarracenorum vel Judeorum, sarracenum vel judeum appellaverit, hec utique convitia, que percussionibus et concussionibus fere equantur, arbitratur curia pro qualitate et dignitate personarum ; et si quis ea vel aliquid eorum dixerit, injuriarum teneatur, et quantum per sententiam vel compositionem prestiterit injuriam passo, tantum et non plus prestare teneatur pro justicia curie; sed inde possit fieri remissio voluntate curie. Sed si vilis persona ea dixerit probo homini, dat justiciam in verberando corpore suo, si averum non habet. 
23.	Homicidia et cetera crimina, que penam sanguinis irrogant, pro arbitrio et judicio domini et sapientum virorum puniuntur. 
24.	Troselli neque fardelli, qui in Montepessulano non venduntur, non donant neque faciunt aliquid usaticum neque theloneum. 
25.	Unus legalis et ydoneus et notus testis creditur in rebus mobilibus usque ad c. solidos. 
26.	Duo legates et ydonei testes ereduntur de omni facto. 
27.	In Montepessulano non fiunt vasa argentea vel aurea nisi fina. 
28.	Omnia officia et officine, que per diversa loca hactenus usitata et frequentata sunt in Montepessulano, in suis locis semper permaneant, et nulla occasione in aliis locis debent mutari, nisi solummodo peisonaria, que semel debet mutari et non sepius, sine dampno illorum quorum modo sunt domus et tabule peissonarie; sed in locis vicinis omnia officia [et officine] augmentari et ampliari possint. 
29.	Dominus Montispessulani, nec aliquis voluntate ejus, in villa Montispessulani nullum debet prestare ducatum vel aliquam securitatem alicui homini, militi vel clerico, vel cuilibet alteri, vel rebus ejus, qui aliquem vel aliquam de villa Montispessulani vel res ejus violenter invaserit, vel vulneraverit, vel occiderit, vel ceperit, vel corporalem contumeliam intulerit per se vel per alium, sine assensu et voluntate dampnum vel injuriam passi vel heredis ejus. Et si alio modo aliquis offensor intraverit villam Montispessulani, injuriam vel dampna passi plenam habent et habere debent potestatem et licentiam ulciscendi sua propria auctoritate. Et de aliquo dampno vel injuria, que illata fuerit illi offensori vel coadjutoribus ejus, nullatenus teneantur, ille qui hoc fecerit vel coadjutores ejus, dampnum vel injuriam sua culpa passis, nec domino vel ejus curie. Et in hiis teneantur offensorum heredes, in hiis dumtaxat in quibus eorum successores possunt esse jure obligati; sed ante prefatam ultionem vel vindictam debent exponere offensi vel eorum heredes querimoniam domino vel curie, et qualitatem maleficii et malefactores declarare sub presencia et testificatione testium, vel cum carta publici notarii, ne res in dubium possit revocari. Sed si, causa orationis tantum, peregrinus venerit ad limina Beate Marie, secure moretur in villa per duos dies et duas noctes, et tercia die secure recedat, nisi fuerit talis qui aliquem vel aliquam de Montepessulano ceperit, vel vulneraverit, vel occiderit, vel corporalem contumeliam intulerit, vel exul de Montepessulano est vel fuerit, quibus nulla datur securitas. 
30.	Si quis extraneus apud quemquam deposuerit vel cuilibet crediderit aurum, argentum, nummos vel alias quaslibet res, vel averum suum miserit in societatem alicui, vel ipsemet tabulam, vel operatorium, vel quodlibet officium exercebit, omnia debent esse salva et secura in pace et guerra; vel si quis miserit filium suum, vel nepotem, vel quemlibet alium ad officium, cum rebus eorum salvi sunt et securi in pace et guerra. 
31.	Omnes et singuli, quicumque et undecumque sint et fuerint, per pacem et per guerram, salvi et securi cum rebus suis possunt ad villam Montispessulani accedere, et ibi morari, et inde exire sine contrarietate, et res ejus in pace et in guerra, etiam sine eo, ei salve et secure debent esse, nisi ex propria culpa ille reus inveniatur. Verumptamen, si in villa vel in castro unde ille sit, homines Montispessulani, dampnum vel injuriam passi, non invenirent ibi exbibitionem justicie et rationis, curia debet indicere illis hominibus illius loci ut cum suis rebus a villa recedant salvi et securi; et post discessum eorum, injuriam vel dampnum passis liceat pignorare et vindicare de hominibus illius loci et rebus eorum in quo loco defectus justicie invenietur, vel in quo loco malefactor malefactum reduxerit. 
32.	Si aliquis homo, miles vel clericus, vel quislibet alius extraneus, deinde debitor fuerit alicujus hominis Montispessulani, et clamore exposito curie de solutione, nisi satisfecerit, liceat creditori sua propria auctoritate illum in persona et rebus suis de solutione sui debiti cogere et pignorare; cujus coactionis vel pignorationis nomine ille creditor vel coadjutores sui domino vel curie, vel etiam illi coacto vel pignorato, nullatenus teneantur obnoxii. Sed clerici in personis non cogantur, sed in rebus, salvo jure et juridictione Magalonensi episcopo in clericis sui episcopatus et rebus eorum. 
33.	Si homines de potestativo et justicia comitatus Melgorii contraxerint vel aliquid commiserint in villa Montispessulani,ibi debent respondere, si ibi inveniantur; et eodem modo, homines Montispessulani sub jurisdictione comitatus Melgorii. Et si extra villam contractum vel commissum fuerit, ultro citroque actor sequitur forum rei. Sed si defectus justicie intervenerit, tunc injuriam vel dampnum passus poterit pignorare, facta proclamatione, ut supradictum est, vel curia potest eum cogere. 
34.	Si aliquis privatus vel extraneus captalarius vel debitor arripiat fugam a villa Montispessulani, creditor, vel quislibet ejus nomine, potest eum capere et retinere, et ferreis vinculis custodire quousque satisfaciat. Et si fugerit quis sine voluntate creditorum, dominus non debet facere vel pati ut redeat sine voluntate creditorum; nec cum avero, vel sine avero, debet eum dominus assecurare donec satisfecerit suis creditoribus. Et omnes res et facultates ejus per rationem libre distribui debent suis creditoribus, salvis privilegiis actionum a lege indultis; et nulla carta, nullum privilegium, nullave facta securitas, impetrata vel impetranda, hiis debet aliquatenus prejudicare. 
35	Debitores qui fuerint non solvendo, creditoribus Xpistianis tradi debent eo tenore quod de villa ista non trahantur. Qui creditores non coguntur in aliquo illos procurare, nisi eos qui non haberent unde viverent, quibus dabitur refectio arbitrio curie. Si tamen, aliquo fortuito casu, sine eorum culpa facti sunt non solvendo, decernere debet curia utrum sint tradendi creditoribus. 
36.	Si vero debitores bona habuerint et non solverint post rem judicatam, infra II menses, bona fide et sine omni malo ingenio, auctoritate curie eorum bona debent distrahi ab ipsis coactis, sin autem a curia; et totum eorum pretium pro rata debiti in solutum cedat omnibus creditoribus, salvis privilegiis actionum a lege indultis; et nemo de evictione rerum distractarum tenebitur, nisi debitor et heres ejus. 
37. Si quis habet bonus in pariete ex inferiori parte, libere potest hedificare in superiorem partem et obscurare lumina ejus, dum tamen pro rata reddat expensas superioris partis parietis; et nemo in pariete possit facere fenestram subtus tegulas; et si facta fuerit, obturetur, nisi vigor pacti ad hoc reclamaverit. 
38. Si mulier fidejusserit pro aliquo vel pro aliqua, tenetur in illis casibus in quibus leges permittunt. Nam secundum leges viget intercessio femine: creditoris ignorancia, obligantis se scientia, largitione, rei proprie racione, renunciatione, pignoris [vel] yppotece remissione, secundo post biennium cautione, coram tribus testibus in instrumento preemissa confessione, libertate, dote, et si exerceat officium et gratia illius intercedat, vel voluntate mariti, efficaciter obligatur. 
39. In rebus immobilibus, licet deceptio excedat dimidiam justi precii, venditio non rescinditur; sed in rebus mobilibus, si ultra dimidiam erit deceptio, penitus rescindetur vel precium suppleatur. 
40. Si pignus fuerit obligatum, non compellatur redimere nisi fuerit conventum, licet pignus minus debito valeat. Nec pro alio debito illud potest retineri; sed, triennio elapso, potest creditor mandato curie rem immobilem distrahere, et sibi satisfacere, nisi debitor commonitus voluerit solvere, vel nisi pactum resistat; et pro evictione rei distracte debitor et heres ejus teneantur et non alius; sed, anno elapso, potest creditor pignus mobile distrahere, nisi debitor commonitus solverit. 
41. Qui prior est in emptione, vel pignore, vel retorno, cum laudimio domini ad quem pertinet, pocior est, salvis privilegiis actionum a lege indultis. 
42. Si quis fuerit confessus se debere, presente creditore vel ejus procuratore, causam exprimat vel non, etiam extra judicium valet; et de procuratione si dubium sit, credatur sacramento precise actoris et procurators tantum, sine testibus; et idem per omnia observetur in omnibus confessionibus extra judicium factis, exceptis in criminibus. 
43. A sententia lata, infra legitimum tempus appellari potest ad dominum, vel ad eum quem dominus ad hoc constituent; et ipse dominus, vel ille qui ad hoc erit constitutus, diligenter debet inquirere si in posse suo aliquis sit jurisconsultus qui nulli partium dederit consilium, vel interfuerit judicio; et cum illo jurisperito debet audire et.terminare causam. Si tamen nullum invenerit, potest vocare extraneos judices, et suis propriis expensis, minoribus quibus potuerit, debet determinare causam; et si appellator obtinuerit, nullas expensas prestabit; sed victus prestet eas minores quas curia poterit; nec curia possit eas exigere, donec causa appellationis sit terminata. 
44.	Si, pendente lite, quis litigatorum dixerit se esse gravatum vel lesum, vel in jure suo diminutum, possit conqueri domino de omnibus curialibus et de singulis; et ipse dominus coram alio judice, sine mora et sine expensis litigatorum, debet eum facere audire et rem determinare. 
45.	Si aliquis de toto posse et districtu Montispessulani manifestum dolosum consilium domino Montispessulani dederit, et ex eo consilio, vel occasione illius, dampnum vel contumelia alii evenerit, ille malignus consiliarius tenetur dampnum. vel injuriam passo omnia restaurare, et preterea est in mercede domini; et dominus non debet [eum] celare, sed tenetur dampnum vel injuriam passo sine mora malum consilium et consiliatorem manifestare. 
46.	Omnia privilegia et scripta data et datura Judeis seu Xpistianis contra rationem, sunt et semper esse debent cassa et nullius momenti. 
47.	Quislibet habitator Montispessulani pro domo vel pro locali sno, cujuscumque sit precii, parvi vel magni, debet salvare lesdas et cuppas; et bajulus Montispessulani debet ei laudare illam domum vel illud locale, salvo suo consilio, si dominus ibi habebit laudimium. Sed quisque canonicus Magalonensis ecclesie, habens domum in Montepessulano valentem D. solidos, salvat cupas et lesdas; et omnes monachi Cysterciensis ordinis, vel eorum homines, habentes vel non habentes domum, salvant cupas et lesdas in tota dominatione Montispessulani. 
48.	Si quis cessaverit solvere canonem pro domo vel pro quolibet honore suo, qui a domino Montispessulani vel ejus feualibus teneatur, etiam longissimo tempore, non habet locum periculum incursionis, sed censum debitum solummodo persolvitur. 
49.	Aliquis habitator Montispessulani non tenetur placitare in curia de Latis, vel in curia Castrinovi, de rebus mobilibus vel de personalibus actionibus, et e converso. 
50.	In rippariis et patuis, omnes ad opus suum vel publicum possunt colligere arenam et pannos exsiccare et lavare; nec potest hoc aliquis prohibere propter aliquam adquisitionem inde factam vel propter longevum usum. 
51.	Piscatio est publica. 
52.	Omne testameutum et omnis quelibet ultima voluntas inter liberos vel parentes vel inter extraneos, in scriptis vel sine scriptis, fiat coram tribus testibus ydoneis rogatis vel non rogatis, sollempnitate adhibita vel omissa. Valet et probatur sufficienter per istos III. testes; et si ante publicationem unus decesserit vel absens fuerit, duo dicentes tercium adfuisse probare possunt sufficienter. 
53.	Filius conjugatus vel filia maritata voluntate patris, intelligitur emancipatus. 
54.	Filia maritata non potest condere testamentum vel ultimam voluntatem sine consilio patris sui vel matris sue, vel, eis deficientibus, propinquorum suorum; et si donum fecerit marito, vel alicui occasione mariti, vel testamentum sine consilio patris sui vel matris sue vel propinquorum suorum, nullius esse debet momenti, sit ipsa major natu vel minor. Sed hec de filia intelliguntur que sine libero est; nam si liberum habuit, queat testari et donare pro libitu suo, sine consilio parentum vel propinquorum. Presentibus autem parentibus vel propinquis, vel absentibus, si per eos steterit quominus interesse velint, potest sine distinctione marito largiri et relinquere quicquid voluerit. 
55.	Omne testamentum per III. testes factum sine heredis institutione valet, et parens potest quicquid voluerit relinquere liberis; et si modicum sit relictum, non possunt liberi conqueri; sed in omnibus et per omnia, sine questione debiti bonorum subsidii et ejus supplementi, liberi debent parere voluntati parentum et suis legatis esse contenti. 
56.	In substitucionibus voluntas defuncti servari debet de cetero, omni loco et tempore, sine beneficio legis Falsidie, inpuberibus vel factis majoribus. 
57.	Si alibi testamentum vel ultima voluntas a patre vel ab extero fiat, legitime probari debet per septem vel quinque testes, non requisitis signaculis vel supra scriptionihus. 
58.	Si quis intestatus decesserit, bona ejus ad liberos , vel ad propinquos suos, deficientibus liberis, debent pertinere; et si filium conjugatum et heredatum, vel filiam ab ipso patre maritatam habuerit, omnia ejus bona ad alios liberos in solidum pertinere debent. Si alios non habuerit, conjugati succedant; sed bona paterna esse debent proximiorum generis paterni; similiter materna proximiorum generis materni, legibus in hac parte nullatenus servandis. 
59.	Si quis testator reliquerit honorem suum pro remedio anime sue, ille vendatur consilio curie, si honor ille a domino Montispessulani teneatur; et precium illius detur eo modo quo testator disposuerit; sed proximiores testatoris de ea re debent certiorari, et si velint tale precium dare, bona fide et sine malo ingenio et sine contrarietate, quale exterus, ante omnes alios proximiores ipsum habeant. 
60.	Toltam vel quistam, vel mutuum coactum, vel aliquam exactionem coactam, non habet nec unquam habuit dominus Montispessulani in habitatoribus Montispessulani, presentibus vel futuris. 
61.	Dominus Montispessulani, vel ejus bajulus, nullatenus donare, vel vendere, vel concedere potest consilium vel laudimium alicujus rei que ab ipso teneatur, donec ipsius rei venditio vel alienatio sit contracta; et idem servare debent omnes qui a domino Montispessulani res aliquas tenent vel tenebunt; et si contra hoc aliquid fiet, rescindi debet, nec vires aliquas poterit obtinere. 
62.	Duellum vel judicium candentis ferri vel aque ferventis, vel alia canonibus vel legibus improbata, nullo modo in curia Montispessulani rata sunt, nisi utraque pars convenerit. 
63.	Ullus bajulus vel aliquis curialium Montispessulani honorem non debet aliquem emere, per se vel per alium, qui a domino Montispessulani teneatur, quandiu stabit in bailia, nec in fraudem istorum aliquid debet facere. 
64.	Ignoti testes audiri vel recipi non debent de factis que fiunt vel fient in Montepessulano, nisi a producente vita eorum probetur inculpabilis et moderata. Sed de factis extra actis recipi debent, licet quod dictum est non probetur. Similiter recipi decent usque ad summam centum solidorum tantummodo, licet eorum vita non probetur inculpabilis et moderata. 
65.	Domestica furta seu rapine vel injurie domestice corrigantur a dominis seu magistris, ita quod non teneantur reddere curie; nec castigati de castigatione audiantur in curia. Domesticos autem intelligimus : uxorem, servos, libertos, mercennarios, filios vel nepotes, discipulos, scolares, auditores, et omnes mares et feminas qui sunt de familia. 
66.	In donationibus, in legatis, in relictis, in permutacionibus, in dotibus vel donationibus propter nuptias, vel pignoribus, dotis nomine mulieri vel ejus viro obligatis, earum rerum que a domino Montispessulani vel ab ejus fenalibus in pertinenciis Montispessulani tenentur vel tenebuntur, nullum habere vel percipere debent dominus vel ejus feuales laudimium vel consilium; et si ille qui transfert honerabit accipientem in certa peccunia danda, si talis sit accipiens cui translator necesse haberet bona sua relinquere, scilicet si fuerit de numero liberorum, parentum, vel fratrum vel nepotum, vel etiam extraneus qui heres instituatur, vel si pro salute anime sue injungat accipienti certam peccuniam dare, ille qui dare debebit peccuniam nullum consilium vel laudimium in jam dictis casibus dabit. In aliis autem casibus laudimium dabit, in quantum peccunie quantitas extendetur. 
67.	Si peccunia detur ludentibus mutuo, creditor contra accipientem vel contra fidejussorem nullam habeat actionem nec inde audiatur; sed si pignus inde habeat, habet inde retencionem. 
68.	Peticio usure de denariis pro denariis nulla est, nec audiri debet, nisi cum sacramento vel fide plevita sit promissa; et hoc est jus commune ut in Xpistianis et Judeis sacramentum et fides plevita in danda usura servetur. 
69.	Periculum incursionis vel penam promissam curia non judicet, nisi sacramento vel fide plevita sit firmata. 
70.	Libellus conventionalis nec spacium xx. dierum detur, sed crastina die post motam querimoniam vel post notionem judicis responderi debet. 
71.	Reis condempnatis quadrimestres inducie non conceduntur, sed judicis arbitrio dentur. 
72.	Debitores vel fidejussores pro arbitrio petentis, prius vel posterius, conveniuntur. 
73.	Fidejussores sine remedio epistole divi Adriani solvere coguntur. 
74.	Donatio inter vivos, carens legitimis documentis, in infinitum valet. 
75.	Per nuncuptionem omnes contractus vigent, in quibus leges inquirunt litterariun consignationes. 
76.	Sentencia diffinitiva lege municipali valet, etsi sine scriptis fuerit recitata. 
77.	Partium fiat citacio judicis arbitrio, sine sollempni dierum numero et sine scriptis. 
78.	Dilationes temporum non serventur, sed ex bono et equo arbitrio judicis abrevientur. 
79.	Judex testes debet inquirere, non autem eis aliquid suggerere. 
80.	Advocati absentia non differuntur jurgia. 
81.	De domibus hominum non hic habitancium nemo debet accipere nisi partem dimidiam obventionum earum; et hoc solummodo accipiatur ad opus comunitatis Montispessulani. 
82.	Domiuus vel locator domus, vel ejus nuncius pro eo, inquilinum potest expellere de domo pro propria domini vel locatoris estargua, nisi conventio ad hoc reclamet; et si non solverit pensionem, potest eum de domo auctoritate sua eicere et domum claudere, et omnia inquilini que intus invenerit pro sua pensione retinere. 
83.	Captalarius non debet prestare lesdam vel cuppas nisi pro ea parte pro qua ad eum pertinet captale, vel pro ea parte pro qua pertinet ad eum lucrum jam tunc adquisitum. 
84.	Ullus dominus Montispessulani, vel aliquis pro eo, nullatenus debet compellere viduam vel aliquam mulierem ad nuptias contrahendas; nec aliquo modo, sine voluntate mulieris et ejus amicorum, inde se debet intromittere. 
85. Sed puella, que nunquam habuit virum, non possit nubere sine consilio parentum suorum vel cognatorum vel gadiatorum; et ille qui eam duceret sine consilio jam dictorum, incidat in miseratione domini persona ejus et tota sua substantia. 
86. Equalitas servari debet in sestariis et eminalibus et in aliis mensuris, et minus vel majus sestarium vel emina non debet esse salis vel brenni quam tritici; et in marcis et unciis et in libris et in aliis ponderibus, et in cannis et alnis, et in ferro quintalli equalitas servari debet, secundum quod antiquitus servatum est; et in esmero auri et argenti similiter; et ad custodiam istorum, duo probi homines constituantur qui bis singulis annis omnia recognoscant. 
87.	In retentis vel retinendis lesdis ab extraneo, nulla pena, nullum periculum incursionis imponatur; sed sorte tenus restituantur. Sed si ab habitatore hujus ville rcquisito retente fuerint, satisfiat inde in duplum. 
88.	Host et cavalgadam habet dominus Montispessulani in hominibus ejusdem ville presentibus et futuris, dumtaxat pro maleficiis et injuriis illatis hominibus, vel dominationi, vel terre Montispessulani, de quibus malefactor nollet facere rationem. Quam cavalgadam tunc homines faciunt secundum antiquum et consuetum modum Montispessulani. 
89.	Dominus Montispessulani non accipit pedaticum in tota terra Montispessulani. 
90.	Pactiones et conventiones et absolutiones quas puelle faciunt patri et matri, vel patri tantum, vel matri post mortem patris, de bonis suis vel parentum, tempore quo maritant eas, etiam si minores xxv. annis fuerint, in perpetuum valeant, dum tamen sacramento firmate fuerint. Sed in omnibus aliis casibus circa mares et feminas etas xxv. annorum spectetur, sicut jus scriptum est. 
91.	Dominus Montispessulani ulla occasione capere vel facere capi nullatenus debet aliquem habitatorem Montispessulani presentium vel futurorum; nec ei dare (corr. denegare) comitatum, nec res ejus aliquatenus occupare vel impedire, qui ei justiciam et rationem facere velit; sed in hiis omnibus ordo judicialis servari debet. Sed ab hoc exules excipiuntur. 
92.	Testis, qui tempore testamenti facti vel negocii contracti erat bone opinionis, licet postea factus sit infamis, nichilominus de eo testamento vel negocio, sicut bonus et legalis testis credatur. 
93.	Extraneus homo, qui in villa Montispessulani du[xerit] uxorem et ibi remanebit, liber sit per annum et diem de cavalgada, host et gacha. 
94.	Statutum est ut probi [et] legales viri de Montepessulano cum jurejurando [eligantur qui debent arbitrari cum jurejurando] bona et facultates singulorum, et indicere et manifestare quantam unusquisque quantitatem debeat dare et expendere in hiis que opus erunt ad constructionem murorum; et isti possunt minuere vel augere in singulis hominibus secundum quod eis bona fide visum fuerit, pro exiguitate, pro tenuitate, pro opulentia patrimonii cujusque. Et isti eligantur cum jurejurando a xiiii, scilicet a duobus de unaquaque scalarum; qui xiiii. jurent eligere bona fide. Et omnia ista sint annualia , ita quod nemo ibi morari debet nisi per annum, et postea alii eodem modo substituantur. Et illi supradicti, quos dicti xiii eligent, debent peccuniam pertinentem ad constructionem murorum accipere et expendere in constructionem, sicut eis melius visum fuerit. 
95.	Dotes vel hereditates, vel propter nuptias donationes, vel sponsalicie largitates, equis passibus non ambulent; sed pro libitu conferentium, ex utraque parte vel ex una sola, valea[n]t.
96.	Monopolium, vel rasza, vel trasza, nullatenus fiat. 
97.	In furnis et molendinis mensura servetur arbitrio bonorum virorum. 
98.	De bulla ita decretum est, ut nemo invitus cogatur bullare. Et si quis bullaverit propria voluntate, non det pro bulla nisi vi. denarios, et pro sigillo cereo IIII. denarios, et non amplius; et quod quidam probus et legalis homo hujus ville, et non alius, teneat bullam et sigillum; et ille teneatur sacramento astrictus universitati hujus ville. 
99. A creditore, seu a dampnum vel injuriam passo, debitor vel malefactor extraneus potest retineri quando suspicatur ut fugiat, cum ad curiam venire renuerit; et si, eo ad curiam deducto, nichil detentor possit consequi, detentus de detentore vel coadjutoribus suis non possit conqueri, si sacramento calumpnie ille detentor se purgaverit; sed ab hoc excipiuntur, secundum quod dictum est, homines comitatus Melgorii et clerici. 
100. Emptio vel vendicio non valet sine palmata, vel sine solutione precii, particulari vel universali, vel sine rei traditione.
101. Arris datis, penitens eas ammittit; accipiens penitens eas in duplura restitnit. 
102. Notarii presentes et futuri nullo loco vel tempore, nulla cansa vel occasione, ea que notant et scribunt, vel coram eis in secreto dicuntur, cogantur domino vel curie vel alicui manifestare, nisi causa perhibendi testimonium. 
103. In nullo loco macelli vendatur caro [hyrcorum vel de cabri, nec caro] de moria, vel infirma vel leprosa pro sana, vel de pecore quod vivens nolit manducare; nec quis vendat carnem de feda vel arietis pro multone castrato, nec carnem de trueia pro carne porci. Si tamen hoc fecerit aliquis, precium carnis in duplum restituat. Sed tamen carnem de moria, vel infirmam, vel non natam nullus vendat infra villam; nec in macello de bocaria vendatur caro ovis, vel multonis, vel agnorum, vel porci, vel bovis, vel de trueia, vel de vaca. 
104. In parietibus novis vel veteribus si quo tempore portalia multa fient, nichil inde domino dari debet. 
105. Si quis extraneus pro quolibet honore homo alterius fuerit et in Montepessulano venerit pro statgua, deinde liber est ab eo hominio; dum tamen honorem, pro quo fuerit homo, domino desamparet. 
106. Dominus Montispessulani vel ejus bajulus nullatenus debet vendere justicias sue curie. 
107. Si aliquis, gratia testium producendorum, causam differat viiii. mensibus, juxta quod lex jubet, debet secreto curialibus nomina testium manifestare, et in actis curie nomina testium debent redigi, et, si neminem illorum ad diem infixam produxerit, deinde omnis ei productio testium denegatur. 
108. Bajulus Montispessulani accipit justicias curie et laudimia tantummodo; et nullum bajulum dominus habere debet in aliquibus suis redditibus Montispessulani, nisi de hominibus ejusdem ville. 
109. Nullus extraneus homo aliquos pannos laneos in Montepessulano tingere potest in grana vel in aliquo colore; nec quis extraneus pannos aliquos in hac villa vendere debet ad tallium , nisi eos quos ad collum portaverit per villam. 
110. Nullus pannus laneus albus tingatur in rogia, ita quod remaneat rubeus, nisi solummodo in grana. 
111. Nemo pro re propria exigat vel accipiat, vel ab uxore seu familia sua exigatur vel accipiatur aliquid nomine reve, nec revam aliquo modo dare teneantur habitatores Montispessulani presentes vel futuri. 
112. Confessiones, testificationes, transactiones et omnia coram arbitris agitata, proinde valeant ac si in curia essent acta. 
113. Nemo cogatur invitus hospites recipere vel albergare. 
114. Si quis habitator Montispessulani vel extraneus intestatus ibi decesserit, et ibi nullus apparebit proximus ad quem ejus bona de jure pertineant, illa bona penes bonos ct securos viros debent deponi, et ab eis per annum et diem servari, ut, si infra illud tempus venerit quis ad quem ea pertineant, ei reddantur, sin autem fisco, qui etiam postea teneatur reddere cui jus voluerit. 
115. Si quis condempnatus fuerit de injuria, tantum det curie pro justicia, et non plus, quantum emendare condempnatus fuerit per sententiam vel compositionem injuriam passo; set inde fiat remissio pro voluntate curie. 
116. Postquam usura equiparata sorti fuerit, deinde usura nullatenus accrescat, ulla temporis diuturnitate; et si etiam sacramento vel fide plevita promissa fuerit, non judicetur in plus Judeis vel Xpistianis, quia ista constitutione ita taxantur. 
117. Omnes et singuli, qui statuti sunt vel fuerint ad redditus domini exigendos vel recipiendos, jurare debent se fideliter illos exigere et recipere, et quod plus quam debitum sit inde non accipiant, nec servicia occasione ipsius officii percipiant. 
118. Res immobiles que in dotem viro traduntur, si premoriatur uxor, vir debet uti et tenere in tota vita sua, nisi pactum in contrarium reclamaverit. 
119. Bajulus, subbajulus, judex vel vicarius, non debent in curia stare nisi per annum, et postea, infra biennium, nemo illorum in curia debet restitui. 
120. Statutum estut xii. probi et legales viri Montispessulani, jam electi ad consulendam communitatem Montispessulani, jurare debent quod bona fide consulant eum quem dominus loco suo statuerit in hac terra; et ille teneatur requirere consilium dictorum xii. et eorum stare consiliis de omnibus que ad communitatem Montispessulani et terre Montispessulani spectabunt. In quibus xn. predictis non ponatur nisi unus solus de uno albergo. Qui xii. non stent in ea amministracione nisi per annum. In fine cujus anni ipsimet xii. debent ad hoc idem alios xii. eligere, prestito sacramento quod eos bona fide eligant. Qui de novo electi per omnia idem jurare debent; et istorum xii. consilio ille qui vices domini in hac terra geret, debet eligere bajulum curie quando dominus presens non fuerit in hac terra. 
121. Hec autem consuetudines in futuris dumtaxat negociis locum obtineant. In preteritis autem nullum vim habeant, nisi ille tantummodo que sunt antique, que in preteritis suam obtineant firmitatem. 
122. Insuper dominus Montispessulani cum jurejurando promittere debet quod justiciam et rationem tenebit et faciet tenere omnibus et singulis qui litigabunt vel litigare debebunt in curia sua, tam pauperi quam diviti, secundum mores et consuetudines hic insertas, vel, eis deficientibus, secundum juris disciplinam. Et bajulus et subbajulus, et judex, et vicarius, et notarius, et omnes curiales curie, presentes et futuri, per omnia jurare debent idem et plus,sicuti in supradicto sacramentali continetur. Et omnes advocati presentes et futuri, exceptis legistis, debent jurare quod bona fide, secundum quod sibi melius visum fuerit, partes pro quibus fungentur officio advocationis consulant et manuteneant; et quod inde peccuniam vel aliam rem seu promissionem, nisi a parte pro qua erunt in lite, non accipiant. Et omnes consiliarii quos sibi curia voluerit assumere, exceptis qui jam juraverunt, debent jurare idem quod dictus judex et bajulus, vel subbajulus, vel judex, vel vicarius. Et aliquis in curia nullatenus stare debet nisi per annum, ut dictum est. 
Et ego P. Dei gratia rex Aragonie, comes Barchinone et dominus Montispessulani, visis, auditis et diligenter examinatis omnibus supradictis et singulis, habita super hiis plenissima deliberatione, et multorum proborum virorum habito consilio, sciens et cognoscens omnia supradicta et singula pertinere ad utilitatem mei et tocius universitatis Montispessulani, spontanea voluntate et proprio mere voluntatis motu, omnia supradicta et singula in perpetuum valitura laudo, statuo, confirmo et decerno omnibus hominibus Montispessulani presentibus et futuris, per me et per omnes successores meos dominos Montispessulani. — Et promitto et convenio toti universitati Montispessulani quod omnia predicta et singula tenebo et observabo, et nullo tempore violabo, et ea omnia faciam in perpetuum teneri nec paciar ab aliquo violari. — Et volo et statuo quod curia Montispessulani judicet secundum predictas consuetudines, et eis in perpetuum inviolabiliter utatur, et, eis deficientibus, secundum jus scriptum. — Sed de omnibus predictis et singulis excipio omnes illos quos feci exules de Montepessulano et de tota terra que fuit G. domini Montispessulani, quondam filii Mathildis duccisse, eo quia, cognoscens eorum culpas, tempore quo terra Montispessulani ad me pervenit, juravi, ad peticionem populi Montispessulani, quod ipsi nunquam in Montepessulano et predicta terra redirent. — Mando preterea et injungo quod regina uxor mea omnia predicta et singula eodem modo laudet et confirmet, mecum vel sine me, ad commonitionem populi Montispessulani, et omnes homines Montispessulani similiter hec omnia se observaturos jurejurando confirment. — Universa et singula suprascripta, per me et per successores meos, in bona fide mea et sub eo sacramento quod, tactis sacrosanctis Evangeliis, feci in domo Milicie, de laudandis et tenendis moribus et consuetudinibus Montispessulani, tempore quo terra Montispessulani ad me pervenit, me observaturum et nulla occasione vel ratione violaturum ex certa scientia promitto et corroboro. — Ad majorem autem firmitatem horum omnium, hanc cartam, et omnes que inde fuerint translate, buelle (sic) mee plumbee patrocinio corroborari precipio. — Acta sunt hec omnia et laudata in ecclesia Beate Marie de Tabulis, ubi hac specialiter de causa fere totus populus Montispessulani ad commune colloquium convenerat, anno ab incarnatione Domini M. cc. iiii, mense augusti, in die Assumptionis sancte Marie, in presentia et testimonio G. Magalonensis prepositi, Gaucelmi canonici, Assalliti de Goza, G. de Durfort, Bernardini, Ancelmi de Massilia, P. de Bisanchas, G. Berengarii, G. de Rabastenes, P. Guiraudi, J. de Latis, Berengarii de Conchis, W. de Conchis, P. de Porta, W. Petri, B. Ecclesia, P. Lobeti, etc. [Sequuntur quadraginta circiter nomina), G. Raimon notarii, Jacobi Laurencii notarii, et aliorum multorum quibus fere tota ecclesia erat plena, et B. de Porta, publici curie Montispessulani notarii, qui hec scripsit. 
Similiter et ego Maria regina Aragonie, comitissa Barchinonie et Montispessulani domina, uxor dicti domini P. regis Aragonie et filia quondam G. domini Montispessulani, visis, auditis et diligenter examinatis omnibus supradictis et singulis, habita etiam super bis plenissima deliberacione, et multorum proborum virorum habito consilio, sciens et cognoscens omnia supradicta et singula pertinere ad utilitatem meam et tocius universitatis Montispessulani, spontanea voluntate et proprio mee voluntatis motu, et specialiter mandato dicti mariti mei domini regis, omnia supradicta et singula in perpetuum valitura laudo, statuo, et confirmo, et decerno, omnibus hominibus Montispessulani presentibus et futuris, per me et per omnes successores meos dominos Montispessulani. — Rursus promitto et convenio toti universitati Montis¬pessulani quod omnia predicta et singula tenebo et observabo et nullo tempore violabo, et ea omnia faciam in perpetuum teneri, nec paciar ab aliquo violari.—Et volo et statuo quod curia mea Montispessulani judicet secundum predictas consuetudines, et eis in perpetuum inviolabiliter utatur, et, eis deficientibus, secundum jus scriptum.—Sed de omnibus predictis et singulis excipio omnes illos quos feci exules de Montepessulano et de tota terra mea, que fuit domini G. Montispessulani, patris mei, eo quia, cognoscens eorum culpas, tempore quo terra patris mei ad me pervenit, juravi ad peticionem populi Montispessulani quod nunquam ipsi in Montempessulanum vel in terram meam redirent. — Universa et singula suprascripta, per me et per successores meos, in bona fide mea et sub eo sacramento quod, tactis sacrosanctis Evangeliis, feci in domo Milicie, de laudandis et tenendis moribus et consuetudinibus Montispessulani, tempore quo hereditas paterna ad me pervenit, me observaturam et nulla ratione vel occasione me violaturam ex certa scientia promitto et corroboro. — Acta sunt hec et a domina regina laudata in camera castelli Montispessulani, anno et mense quo supra, v. kalendas septembris. Testes sunt : G. propositus Magalonensis, P. de Bisanchas, P. de Porta, P. de Conchas, W. filius ejus, Berengarius de Conchas, R. Atbrandus, P. Lobetus, R. Benedictus, B. Ecclesia, P. Luciani, Deodatus Bocados, etc., etc. (Sequuntur sexaginta circiter nomina testium qui plerique superius, ad calcem juramenti Petri regis, jam subscripserunt.) 








<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>This document is a detailed record of the laws and rights agreed on between the lords of Montpellier, Marie and her husband Peter of Aragon,  and the people of the city.  The editor of the Latin text chose to put some passages in brackets because they do not appear in the earlier published text by M. Giraud, who did not have access to this version of the document.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>1. The law of Falcidia, dating from 40 BCE, prohibited the bequeathing of more than ¾ of the inheritance away from the principal heir, that is, it required that a fourth go to the instituted heir. That law is not recognized here. <br>2. According to Du Cange, the<em> hemina</em> is a measure of a pound or pound and a half. <br>3. <em>Rasum</em> seems to be some sort of weight of payment, which can be annual. <em>Trasza</em> is connected with trade, perhaps the drawing of an order or bill of exchange. <br>4. The text and translation were provided by Ashleigh Imus.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layettes du Trésor des Chartes</em>, ed. Alexandre Teulet (Paris: Henri Plon, 1863), 255-66, #721.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1204, August 15