---
letter_id: "25026"
title: "A letter from Bernard of Clairvaux, abbot (before 1139)"
ititle: "a letter from bernard of clairvaux, abbot (before 1139)"
ltr_date: "before 1139"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-13"
url: "/letter/1325.html"
senders:
  - id: 21275
    name: Bernard of Clairvaux, abbot
    iname: bernard of clairvaux, abbot
    type: people
    url: /people/21275.html
receivers:
  - id: 166
    name: Adelaide of Leuven
    iname: adelaide of leuven
    type: woman
    url: /woman/166.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the Duke and Duchess of Lorraine, Bernard, abbot of Clairvaux, so to love/delight in each other with dear and chaste embraces. that only the love of Christ surpasses [all] in both.

Since we began, out of necessity, to send to your land, we have always found much intimacy and charity in the eyes of your dignity/office.  You have shown the blessing of your generosity to our men liberally, as it was necessary.  Free passage to travelers, and anything that was owed to you of right, you freely set aside. From all of which, great mercy is without doubt yours in heaven, if we truly believe what the Lord promises in the Gospel:  Whatever you have done to the least of mine, you have done to me [Math.25:40].  But why is it that you allow your ministers to demand again what your have given [up].  It is worthy and honorable to you that what it pleased you to give for the salvation of your souls, none of your men should dare to ask for.  If therefore you do not, God forbid, repent of the benefits, and the gift which we often received from you by your good will, and have up to now, still pleases both of you, order that it be held firmly and without trouble, so that our brothers may no longer fear to be disturbed because of this by any of your ministers.  Otherwise, we do not refuse to follow the example of our Lord, who did not disdain to pay tax for himself, and we are prepared willingly to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and toll to whom toll [is due], and tribute to whom tribute, especially since, accordingly to the Apostle, we ought not seek so much a gift to us, as profit to you [Phil.4:17]. 


<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Duci et Ducissae Lotharingiae, Bernardus, abbas de Claravalle: sic suis ad invicem caris ac castis delectari amplexibus, ut solus amor Christi superet in ambobus.  

Ex quo coepimus mittere pro nostra necessitate in terram vestram, multam semper invenimus in oculis vestrae dignitatis familiaritatem et gratiam. Benedictionem largitatis vestrae nostris hominibus, cum  necesse fuit, liberaliter exhibuistis. Passagium transeuntibus, et si quod est aliud iuris vestri debitum, mercantibus libenter dimisistis. De quibus omnibus sine dubio merces vestra multa est in caelis, si tamen verum esse credimus quod Dominus in Evangelio promittit: QUAMDIU FECISTIS UNI EX MINIMIS MEIS, HOC MIHI FECISTIS. Sed quid est quod ministros vestros, quae vos donastis, exigere rursum permittitis? Dignum est vobis et honorificum, ut quod vobis pro salute animarum vestrarum placuit donate, nemo vestrorum repetere audeat. Si ergo vos, quod absit, beneficiorum vestrorum  non paenitet, donumque quod in beneplacito vestro a vobis saepe recepimus, aeque adhuc ut habeamus, utrique vestrum complacet, iubete ita firmiter et inconcusse teneri, quatenus ultra fratres nostri a nullo ministrorum vestrorum timeant propter hoc disturbari. Alioquin non renuimus Domini nostri sequi exemplum, qui pro se non dedignatus est solvere censum, parati et nos libenter quae sunt Caesaris Caesari reddere, et vectigal cui vectigal, et tributum cui tributum, praesertim quia, iuxta Apostolum, non tam debemus requirere datum nostrum, quam vestrum lucrum.


<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bernard thanks the duke and duchess for the tolls they have so far forgiven, but hopes that the charity of princes is not subverted by the deeds of their ministers, who are now trying to collect those tolls.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Bernardi, Opera</em> (Rome: Cistercians, 1974), ed. J. Leclercq, H. Rochais, v7.299-300, ep.119.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>before 1139