---
letter_id: "25030"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Aquitaine (1199)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of aquitaine (1199)"
ltr_date: "1199"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2016-04-10"
url: "/letter/1329.html"
senders:
  - id: 24
    name: Eleanor of Aquitaine
    iname: eleanor of aquitaine
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Eleanor, by the grace of God queen of England, duchess of Normandy and Aquitaine, countess of Anjou, to the archbishops, bishops, counts, viscounts, barons, and all who will see the present writing, future as well as present, greeting.
You should know that we have given and conceded and confirmed by this our present charter, to our dearest friend and relative Andreas of Chauvigny and his heirs, the whole fief of Sancta Severa, and the homages and allegiances of said fief, and whatever we have there.
Because of which we wish and firmly command that that same Andreas and his heirs have said fief with its homages and allegiances and possess it in perpetuity with all its appurtenances, freely, wholly, fully, with honor.
And so that this our gift may continue firm and unimpaired in future times, we have reinforced it with the protection of our seal and the subscription of witnesses.
With these witnesses:  Robert, count of Leicester, Baldwin, count of Aumale, Gerard of Fourneval, William of Estain, Godfrey of Celle, William Marshal, count of Pembroke, Hugo of Fontenelle, William Torpin, Elias of Sancta Severa, who was present and did homage to said Andreas before everyone.
Dated at Le Vaudreuil by the hand of Roger, our chaplain, in the 1199th year of the incarnation of the Word.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Alienor, Dei gratia regina Anglie, ducissa Normannie, Aquitanie, comitissa Andegavie, archiepiscopis, episcopis, comitibus, vicecomitibus, baronibus, et omnibus presens scriptum inspecturis, tam presentibus quam futuris, salutem. —Noveritis nos dedisse et concessisse, et hac presenti carta nostra confirmasse, karissimo amico et consanguineo nostro Andree de Calvigniaco et heredibus suis totum feodum de Sancta Severa, et homagia, et ligiamenta predicti feodi, et quicquid ibidem habebamus. — Quare volumus et firmiter precipimus ut idem Andreas et heredes sui predictum feodum, cum homagiis et ligiamentis, habeat et in perpetuum possideat libere, integre, plenarie, honorifice, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis. — Et ut ista donatio nostra firma et illibata futuris temporibus perseveret, eam sigilli  nostri munimine et testium subscriptione roboravimus. Hiis testibus : Roberto comite Legrecestie, Baduwino comite de Albamarla, Girardo de Fornivalle, Willelmo de Stagno, Galfrido de Cella, Willelmo Marescallo comite de Penbroc, Hugone de Fontenellis, Wilhelmo Torpin, Helia de Sancta Severa, qui presens erat et coram omnibus homagium fecit predicto Andree. — Data apud Vallem-Rodolii per manum Rogeri capellani nostri, anno Verbi incarnati millesimo centesimo nonagesimo nono.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen confers the whole fief of Sancta Severa on her relative, Andreas of Chauvigny. In another charter summarized in the <em>Layettes</em> (1.211, #516), Eleanor and her son king John declare or confirm that they have given the whole fief to Andreas: (Alienor) Angliae regina, ducissa Normanniae et Aquitaniae, et Johannes Angliae rex, ejus filius, totum feodum de Sancta Severa, cum ejusdem pertinentiis, Andreae de Calvigniaco consanguineo suo se donare declarant.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes,</em> ed. A. Teulet (Paris: Henri Plon, 1863), 209, #508.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1199