---
letter_id: "25040"
title: "A letter from Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne (1218, September)"
ititle: "a letter from blanche of navarre, countess of champagne (1218, september)"
ltr_date: "1218, September"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2016-04-13"
url: "/letter/1339.html"
senders:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Blanche, palatine countess of Troyes, makes known that her beloved and faithful/liege Huard, knight of Sainte Menehould, with the consent of his wife Castellana, sold six sesters of grain, annual and perpetual rent/income to be received in the tithing of St. Menehould, to the church of Castres in perpetuity, and moreover to have granted to said church for the use of its animals and cattle, to pasturage in the woods as well as the lands of Sivrey.  All of which the countess and her son, Thibaut, count of Champagne, declare that they support and grant.  In witness and confirmation of which, I wished the present charter to be fortified by the protection of my seal.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Blancha, comitissa Trecensis palatina, notum facit dilectum et fidelem suum Huardum militem de Sancta Maneildi, annuente Castellana ejus uxore, sex sestarios bladi, annui et perpetui redditus, in decima S. Maneildis, percipiendos, ecclesiae Castricensi in perpetuum vendidisse, et insuper praefatae ecclesiae concessisse, ad usus animalium et pecudum ejusdem, pascua tam in silvis quam in terris de Sivreio.  Quae omnia ipsa comitissa et filius ejus Theobaldus, comes Campaniae, se laudare et concedere declarant. – In cujus rei testimonium et confirmationem, presentem cartam fieri volui sigilli mei munimine roboratam.  – Actum anno gratie MoCCo octavodecimo, mense septembri.







<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The charter confirms a sale of rents and grant of use of his lands by one of the countess’s knights to a church.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes,</em> ed. A. Teulet, 1.472, #1315.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1218, September