---
letter_id: "25042"
title: "A letter from Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne (1219, June)"
ititle: "a letter from blanche of navarre, countess of champagne (1219, june)"
ltr_date: "1219, June"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-17"
url: "/letter/1341.html"
senders:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Blanche, countess palatine of Troyes, make known to all present and future that I, as well as my son Th[ibaut] count of Champagne, have received as our man our beloved and faithful Hervey, lord  of Sombernon, for the twenty pounds which his father was accustomed to have in the fairs of Bar-le-Duc, and we gave him fifty silver marks.  He indeed swore to us that he will help us and our heirs in good faith, in himself, his people, and his fortresses and, if need be, he will make war as chief against Erard of Brienne and his wife Philippa, and against Alice queen of Cyprus and their heirs, and against their allies.  It should moreover be known that the heirs of said Hervey who will hold Mailly will have the fief of said twenty pounds.

Enacted in the year of the lord one thousand two hundred nineteenth, in the month of June.


<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego, Blancha, comitissa Trecensis palatina, notum facio presentibus et futuris quod, tam ego quam filius meus Th. comes Campanie, recepimus in hominem nostrum dilectum et fidelem nostrum Herveyum, dominum de Sumbernon, de viginti libris quas pater ejus habere solebat in nundinis Barri, et eidem dedimus quinquaginta marchas argenti. – Ipse vero nobis juravit quod nos et heredes nostros bona fide juvabit de se, et de gentibus suis, et de forteretiis suis, et, si opus fuerit, in capite guerreabit contra Erardum de Brena et Philippam uxorem ejus, et contra Aalidem reginam Cypri, et heredes eorum, et contra coadjutores eorumdem.-- Sciendum est autem quod feodum predictarum viginti librarum habebit heres predicti Herves qui Maalem tenebit. – Actum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo nonodecimo, mense junio.










<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess confirms the fief arrangements with Hervey of Sombernon.  Queen Alice of Cyprus was Philippa's sister.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes</em>, ed. A. Teulet, 1.482, #1351.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, June