---
letter_id: "25043"
title: "A letter from William of Joinville, Archbishop of Reims (1219, June)"
ititle: "a letter from william of joinville, archbishop of reims (1219, june)"
ltr_date: "1219, June"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-17"
url: "/letter/1342.html"
senders:
  - id: 21630
    name: William of Joinville, Archbishop of Reims
    iname: william of joinville, archbishop of reims
    type: people
    url: /people/21630.html
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>William, by the grace of God humble minister of the church of Reims, to all who will see the present letters greetings in the Lord.   Your community should know that we have received our beloved and faithful Blanche, countess palatine of Champagne, as our woman, as guardian, for all those things which she like her predecessors the counts of Champagne held from our predecessors, the archbishops of Reims.  – And also we received her as our woman for what she holds in our fief  from the dower assigned to her. – We received her son, Th[ibaut] count of Champagne as our man for all those things which his grandfather, count Henry of bright memory, is known to have held from our predecessors. – Enacted at Reims, in the 1219th year of grace, in the month of June.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Willelmus, Dei gratia Remensis ecclesie minister humilis, omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis in Domino salutem. —Noverit universitas vestra quod nos dilectam et fidelem nostram Blancham, comi- tissam Campanie palatinam, recepimus in feminam nostram, tanquam de ballio, de hiis omnibus que, tam ipsa quam predecessores sui comites Campanie, a predecessoribus nostris archiepiscopis Remensibus tenuerunt. — Et etiam recepimus eam in feminam nostram de eo quod tenet in feodo nostro de dotalicio sibi assignato.—Filium autem ejus Th. comitem Campanie recepimus in hominem nostrum de hiis omnibus que clare memorie comes Henricus, avus ejus, de nostris predecessoribus dinoscitur tenuisse. — Actum Remis, anno gratie M° cc° nonodecimo, mense junio.





<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>William of Joinville, archbishops of Reims, records the renewal of the hereditary feudal relation between the county of Champagne and the archbishopric of Reims.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layette du Tresor des Chartes,</em> ed. A. Teulet, 1.482, #1349.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, June