---
letter_id: "25044"
title: "A letter from Peter, abbot of St. Denis (1221, February)"
ititle: "a letter from peter, abbot of st. denis (1221, february)"
ltr_date: "1221, February"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-23"
url: "/letter/1343.html"
senders:
  - id: 21513
    name: Peter, abbot of St. Denis
    iname: peter, abbot of st. denis
    type: people
    url: /people/21513.html
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Lord.  Your community should know that we have received from the noble lady Blanche, illustrious countess of Troyes, in Paris, where she had come for her affairs, the homage which she was held to do to us, except as it might injure us or the church of St. Denis or the countess or her heirs that we accepted it in Paris.  For we say that she was held to do that at St. Denis.  She however said that she was not held to do that except in the county of Troyes.   And so, saving the rights of each side, we accepted her homage in Paris. – In memory of which we have put forth the present letters confirmed by the protection of our seal.  Enacted in Paris, in the 1221st year of grace, in the month of February, on the Saturday after the feast of St. Matthew the apostle.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Petrus, Dei gratia abbas Beati Dyonisii, universis presentes litteras inspecturis, in Domino salutem. – Noverit universitas vestra quod nos a nobili domina Blancha, illustri comitissa Trecensi, recepimus Parisius, ubi venerat pro negociis suis, hominagium quod nobis facere tenebatur, eo salvo quod nobis nec ecclesie Beati Dyonisii nec etiam ipsi comitisse aut ejus heredibus prejudicium faciat quod illud recepimus Parisius. Dicimus enim quod illud tenetur facere apud Sanctum Dyonisium. Ipsa vero dicebat quod non tenebatur facere nisi in comitatu Trecensi. Et sic, salvo jure utriusque partis, recepimus Parisius hominagium suum. — In cujus rei memoriam, presentes litteras emisimus sigilli nostri munimine roboratas.   Actum Parisius, anno gratie M° cc° vicesimo primo, mense februario, sabbatho post festum Sancti Mathie apostoli.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The abbot records the homage he received from the countess when she was in Paris, although she noted that she was supposed to offer it in Troyes, not in Paris.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layette du Tresor des Chartes</em>, ed. A. Teulet, 1.537-38, #1501.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1221, February