---
letter_id: "25047"
title: "A letter from and Thibaut IV, count of Champagne (1217, October 24)"
ititle: "a letter from and thibaut iv, count of champagne (1217, october 24)"
ltr_date: "1217, October 24"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-21"
url: "/letter/1346.html"
senders:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
  - id: 26187
    name: Thibaut IV, count of Champagne
    iname: thibaut iv, count of champagne
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Blanche, countess palatine of Troyes, and her son Thibaut, count palatine of Champagne and Brie, make known that they have sold the wood of their forests situated above Kolmar to Renard of Meledun, Benedict of Banisiac, Geoffrey Morello and their comrades, namely one arpent, by Kolmar measure, for the price of sixty shillings on the condition that all the wood be removed by said buyers within six years of the present feast of All Saints, nor may they cut a tree unless at a time and way that it can grow back swiftly and easily.  – Besides they declare that they sell forty arpents of woods by the measure of Provins, in its forest of Want, to be removed thence within ten years from the present feast of All Saints, to the same merchants for the price of two thousand pounds, promising that they sell or will give nothing from said forest without the permission of said merchants for four years. – Enacted in the 1217th year of grace, on Tuesday before the feast of the apostles, Simon and Jude.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Blancha, comitissa Trecensis palatina, et Theobaldus, Campaniae et Briae comes palatinus, ejus filius, notum faciunt se ligna duarum forestellarum suarum, sitarum desuper Columbarium, Renardo de Meleduno, Benedicto de Banisiaco, Gaufrido Morello et eorum sociis vendidisse, videlicet unumquodque arpentum, ad mensuram Columbarii, pretio sexaginta solidorum, ea conditione ut totum lignum a praedictis emptoribus sit amotum ab instanti festo Omnium Sanctorum in sex annos, nec possint arborem secare nisi semel et eo modo quo citius et commodius revenire valeat. —Praeterea quadringenta arpenta nemoris ad mensuram Pruvini, in foresta sua de Want, exinde ab instanti festo Omnium Sanctorum in decem annos amovenda, se iisdem mercatoribus pretio duorum miIlium librarum vendere declarant, promittentes quod de dicta foresta nichil, absque praefatorum mercatorum licentia, usque ad quatuor annos vendent vel donabunt. — « Actum anno gratie m ° cc° septimodecimo, die martis ante festum apostolorum Symonis et Jude. »

  


<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess and her son record the terms of sales of wood to certain merchant
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes</em>, ed. A. Teulet, 1.450, #1242.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1217, October 24