---
letter_id: "25051"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1218, August)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1218, august)"
ltr_date: "1218, August"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-03"
url: "/letter/1350.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I [Alix] duchess of Burgundy make known to all who will see the present letters that I have sworn on the sacred relics to my lord Philip, by the grace of God illustrious king of France, that I shall do good and faithful service to him against all men and women who might live and die and that I shall contract matrimony with no one except with the consent and will of the lord king.

To hold firmly to this, I have given him these pledges:  William, namely, of Vergy, Pons of Grancey, Robert of Beauvais, Odo of Grancey, Guido of Til, Clarembald of Chappes, Hugo of Lormes, John of Chateau-neuf, magnate of Dijon, provost of Corvey, Raynier of Chatillion, Brocard of Dijon, and John Garner.

If however, it should happen -- let it not be so – that I renege on these conventions, the forenamed pledges, with all their fiefs and lands and all their power, would stand against me to the aid of the lord king until it was completely emended to the will of the king.

Enacted at Paris, in the year of the lord 1218, in the month of August.


<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego [Alix] ducissa Burgundie notum facio universis presentes litteras inspecturis quod ego super sacrosancta juravi karissimo domino meo Philippo, Dei gratia illustri Francie regi, quod bonum et fidele fatiam ei servitium contra omnes homines et feminas qui possunt vivere et mori, et quod cum nullo contraham matrimonium nisi de assensu et voluntate domini regis. – De hoc autem firmiter tenendo dedi eidem hos plegios:  Guillelmum, videlicet, de Vergi, Pontium de Granci, Robertum de Belves, Odonem de Grantiaco, Guidonem de Tilio, Clarembaudum de Capis, Hugonem de Ulmo, Johannem de Castro-novo, majorem de Divione, prepositum de Corveia, Renerum de Castellione, Brocardum de Divione et Johannem Garnerum.  – Si autem de hiis conventionibus, quod absit, me contingeret resilire, prenominati plegii, cum omnibus feodis et terris et toto posse suo, contra me essent in auxilium domini regis, usquedum ad voluntatem domini regis id esset integre emendatum. – Actum Parisius, anno Domini MoCCo octavodecimo, mense augusto,
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>After the death of her husband, the duchess pledges to the king of France not to remarry without his consent.  In a document made and sealed on the same date in the same place (#1306), the first eight pledges, named in the same order, affirm their oathes “at the order and will of our lady the duchess of Burgundy” (de precepto et voluntate domine nostre ducisse Burgundie) to support the king against her should she ever renege on her agreement with the king. The Layettes gives two other documents enacted at Beaune by other men to the same effect (## 1307, 1308).  <h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes</em>, ed. A. Teulet (Paris: Henri Plon, 1863), 1.468-69, #1305.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1218, August