---
letter_id: "25054"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1221, December)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1221, december)"
ltr_date: "1221, December"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-03-29"
url: "/letter/1353.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
  - id: 21245
    name: Thibaut, count of Champagne
    iname: thibaut, count of champagne
    type: people
    url: /people/21245.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Alix duchess of Burgundy makes known and confirms the letters of Erard of Brienne and Philippa his wife in the month of November dated on the eve of St. Martin for the release they made of the counties of Champagne and Brie to the countess of Troyes and her son.  "I therefore in witness of all these at the request [of said Erard and Philippa] gave the present page reinforced by the impression of my seal to said countess B[lanche] and her son Th[ibaut], approving and, as far as it pertains to me, confirming it.  Enacted in the one thousand two hundred twentyfirst year of grace, in the month of December."
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Alaydis ducissa Burgunidae notas facit et confirmat litteras tam Erardi de Brena, quam Philippa uxoris ejus, mense novembri, in vigilia B. Martini datas, pro quittatione comitatuum Campaniae et Briae comitissae Trecensi et ejus filio ab eis facta.  – “Ego igitur in horum omnium testimonium, ad petitionem [dictorum Erardi et Philippe] presentem paginam sigilli mei impressione roboratam supradictis B. comitisse et Th. nato ejus tradidi, approbans eadem, et, quantum ad me pertinet, confirmans.  Actum anno gratie millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo primo, mense decembri.”
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>This brief document begins with a description of its content:  “Alix duchess of Burgundy makes known and confirms the letters of Erard of Brienne and Philippa his wife in the month of November dated on the eve of St. Martin for the release they made of the counties of Champagne and Brie to the countess.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes</em>, ed. A. Teulet (Paris: Henri Plon, 1863), 1.534, #1486.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1221, December