---
letter_id: "25059"
title: "A letter from Thibaut  III, count of Troyes and Champagne (1199, July 1)"
ititle: "a letter from thibaut  iii, count of troyes and champagne (1199, july 1)"
ltr_date: "1199, July 1"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/1358.html"
senders:
  - id: 26190
    name: Thibaut III, count of Champagne and Troyes
    iname: thibaut iii, count of champagne and troyes
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the holy and individual Trinity, I Thibaut, count palatine of Troyes, make known by the testimony of this writing to present and future that I have given in dower and yielded seven of my castles, with all their appurtenances and appendages, namely Epernay, Vertus, Sezanne, Chantemerle, Pontes, Nogent-sur-Seine, Mery-sur-Seine, and whatever I had in those castles in my own domain as well as in fiefs and the care of churches, and in all manner and condition, to my wife countess Blanche, daughter of the king of Navarre, with the following present and hearing:  Adela, illustrious queen of France, and Berengar, queen of England, and the venerable men, bishops Raynaud of Chartres and Rot[rod] of Chalons-sur-Marne, and Garnier of Troyes, and Geoffrey count of La Perche, and W. count of Joigny, and G. count of Brienne, Galfred seneschal of Champagne, Galcher of Castile, and my marshal Galfred, and many others.  – That this many remain known and kept in force I have strengthened what is noted by letters with the protection of my seal.  Enacted at Chartres, in the one thousand one hundred ninetyninth year of the Word incarnate.  Given by the hand of Walter, chancellor, on the kalends of July.  Note of Peter.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine sancte et individue Trinitatis, ego Theobaldus Trecensis comes palatinus scripti hujus testimonio tam presentibus quam futuris notum facio quod septem de castellis meis, cum omnibus pertinentiis et appenditiis suis, videlicet Spernacum, Virtutum, Sezanniam, Cantumerulam, Pontes,  Nogentum, Meriacum, et quicquid in castellariis eorum habebam, tam in proprio dominio quam in feodis et in custodiis ecclesiarum, et in omnibus modis et commodis, uxori mee comitisse Blanche, filie regis Navarre, dedi in dotalicium et concessi, presentibus et audientibus: Adela illustri regina Francie, et Berangeria regina Anglie, et venerabilibus viris Regnaudo Carnotensi, et Rot[rodo] Cathalaunensi, et Garnerio Trecensi episcopis, et Galfrido comite Pertici, et W. comite Jovigniaci, et G. comite Brene, Galfrido senescalco Campanie, Galchero de Castillione, et Galfrido marescalco meo, et quampluribus aliis. — Quod ut notum permaneat et ratum teneatur litteris annotatum, sigilli mei munimine roboravi. Actum apud Carnotum, anno incarnati Verbi millesimo centesimo et nonagesimo nono. Datum per manum Galteri cancellarii in kalendis julii. Nota Petri.






<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>This charter records the dower Thibaut gave to Blanche.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes</em>, ed. A. Teulet (Paris, Plon, 1863), 1.204, #497</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1199, July 1