---
letter_id: "25064"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1218, August)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1218, august)"
ltr_date: "1218, August"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1363.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all present and future, that the commune of Dijon swore at my order that if I married anyone except by the will of my dearest lord Philip, king of the Franks, or if I should not give the service I owe him, said commune, without misdeed, will hold itself to the lord King and will go against me, until there is satisfaction to the lord King, except for the customs and freedom of said commune.  That this be held fixed and firm, I have appended my seal to the present page.  Enacted in the one thousand two hundred eighteenth year of the Lord, in the month of August.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego, Aalidis ducissa Burgundie, notum facio presentibus et futuris, quod communia Divionensis ad mandatum meum juravit, quod si alicui nupsero, nisi de voluntate karissimi domini mei Philippi, regis Francorum, vel ei prout debuero non serviero, dicta communia, absque malefacto, ad dominum Regem se tenebit, et contra me ibit, donec inde domino Regi fuerit satisfactum, salvis tamen consuetudinibus et libertate dicte communie.  Quod ut ratum et firmum habeatur, presenti pagine sigillum meum apposui.  Actum anno Domini millesimo CCo octavo decimo, mense augusto.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess has the commune of Dijon swear to go over to the king (Philip Augusts) if she should contract another marriage without his consent, or otherwise fail him.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit,<em> Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.164, #1521.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1218, August