---
letter_id: "25066"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1218, October)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1218, october)"
ltr_date: "1218, October"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1365.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters that lord Henry of Salives, knight, in my presence, acknowledged that he had given and conceded to the abbot and convent of Fontenay, pasturage for the use of all their sheep, and fodder for their pigs from a certain wood of his which is called Quartier, to have and to hold until he will have given back to said abbot, wholly and peacefully, 20 pounds of Estephan money for which he is bound to them.  I am held, at the request of said knight, to indemnify said abbot and convent if anyone wished to do them harm over this.  In witness of which thing, I have signed the present letters with my seal.  Enacted in the 1218th year of grace, in the month of October.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaidis, duchissa Burgundie, notum facio universis presentes litteras inspecturis quod dominas Henricus de Salive, miles, in presentia mea constitutus, recognovit se tradidisse et concessisse abbati et conventui Fonteneti, ad opus pecorum suorum omnium, pasturam et pastum ad opus porcorum cujusdam nemoris sui, quod vocatur Quartiers, habendum et tenendum donec XX libr. Stephan. monete, quibus eis tenetur, dicto abbati integre reddiderit et quiete. Ego vero ad petitionem dicti militis dictos abbatem et conventum indempnes conservare teneor, si quis eos super hoc voluerit molestare. In cujus rei testimonium, presentes litteras sigillo meo firmavi. Actum anno Gratie M°CC°XVIIIo mense octobris.




<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess makes known a donation by Henry of Salives to the monks of Fontenay, of rights of pasturage in the woods of Quartier.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit,&nbsp;<em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.165, #1528..</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1218, October