---
letter_id: "25075"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1219, August)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1219, august)"
ltr_date: "1219, August"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1374.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all that when the monks of Longuay complained about the provost of Aignay because each year he took a cartload of hay in his fields that belong to his granary, which is called Grandbois, saying that the duke of Burgundy was supposed to have said cartload in his fields every year.  I inquired into the truth of the claim from elders of Aignay; they testified that the duke had no abovementioned right at all, for which reason I absolved said monks from an exaction of this kind, by the counsel of the prudent, in perpetuity freely and benignly.  Enacted in the 1219th year of the Lord in the month of August.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaidis, ducissa Burgundie, omnibus notum facio quod cum monachi Longivadi conquererentur de preposito de Empnay, eo quod annuatim capiebat unam carigitam feni in pratis suis que pertinent ad grangiam suam, que vocatur Grandis Boscus, dicens quam dux Burgundie dictam charveatam in illius pratis debebat habere annuatim. Ego inquisivi super hoc rei veritatem a senioribus de Empnay; igitur testificati fuerunt quod dux in hoc quod suprascriptum nullum omnino jus habebat, propter quod ego dictos monachos, de consilio prudentium, in perpetuum ab hujusmodi exauctione absolvi liberaliter et benigne.  Actum anno Domino Mo CCo XIXo mense augusto.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess makes an agreement with the monks of Longuay over claims made by the duke’s provost/reeve on hay from land at Aignay.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.173-74, #1571.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, August