---
letter_id: "25077"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1219, September)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1219, september)"
ltr_date: "1219, September"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1376.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all that I by my free will have released to the Cistercian house and brothers whatever I was said to have or had of right in the town of Corcelles, which Eudes of good memory, duke of Burgundy, my lord, will have given in alms to said house and said brothers without our assent.  Moreover other gifts and whatever alms said duke will have made to them in his life, as is contained in Cistercian charters, I held in force and commended and approved after the death of that duke and confirmed with the protection of our seal.  Enacted in the 1219th year from the incarnation of the Lord, in the month of September.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaydis, ducissa Burgundie, monibus notum facio quod ego spontanea voluntate quitavi domui et fratribus Cistercii quicquid juris dicebam me habere vel habebam in villa de Corcellis, quod Odo, bone memorie dux Burgundie, dominus meus sine assensu nostro predicte domui et dictis fratribus dederat in elemosinam.  Insuper alia dona et elemosinas quascumque eis fecerat predictus dux in vita sua, sicut in cartis Cistercii continetur, post mortem ipsius ducis, ego rata habui et laudavi et approbavi, et sigilli nostri munimine confirmavi.  Actum anno ab incarnatione Domini Mo CCo XIXo mense septembri.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess cedes to the abbey of Citeaux the rights she has at Corcelles.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit,&nbsp;<em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.174, #1575.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, September