---
letter_id: "25079"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1219, December 5)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1219, december 5)"
ltr_date: "1219, December 5"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1378.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all who see these letters that Pons Berard of Grosbois released and granted in good faith to the church of Saint-Seine whatever he had of right in Robert and Stephen of Grosbois, and in their heirs to hold in perpetuity and possess in peace.  He granted also in alms to the priory of St. Maximino one measure (aymina) of grain, that is half corn and the other half oats from his tithe and his thirds (terciis) from Grosbois to be paid annually.  In witness of this thing I have had my seal appended to these letters at the request of both sides.  Enacted in the 1219th year of Grace on the day after St. Nicholas.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaydis, ducissa Burgundie, omnibus litteras istas videntibus notum facio quod Pontius Berarz de Grosso Boscho quittavit et bona fide concessit ecclesie Sancti Sequani quicquid juris habebat in Roberto et Stephano de Grosso Boscho, et in suis heredibus in perpetuum habendos et in pace possidendos. Concessit etiam in elemosinam prioratui de Sancto Maximino unam ayminam bladi scilicet medietatem frumenti et aliam medietatem avene de decima sua et terciis suis de Grosso Boscho annuatim reddendam. In hujus rei testimonium litteris istis ad petitionem utriusque partis sigillum meum apponi feci. Actum anno Gratie M° CCo nono decimo in crastino Sancti Nicholai.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess makes known donations made to the abbey of Saint-Seine by Pons of Grosbois.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit,&nbsp;<em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.177, #1586..</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, December 5