---
letter_id: "25080"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1219)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1219)"
ltr_date: "1219"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1379.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters, that I have had from the brothers of Longuay a hundred Provins pounds because I had given, conceded and completely released to the same brothers whatever they had acquired from the noble man, Simon, lord of Chateauvillain from my fief in two towns of Dancevoir and in all the appurtenances of those towns.  So that if my son or his heirs should wish to revoke my donation and any grant, when the time of his minority is ended, or do harm to said brothers over this, he will be held to give back said money in its entirety to the church and the brothers of Longuay.  And it should be known that my counsellors had 20 Provins pounds for this.  I indeed am held to bear full surety to said brothers over this as long as my son Hugh is in wardship.  That this remain firm, I have strengthened these letters will the protection of my seal.  Enacted in the 1219th year of the Lord.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Aalis, ducissa Burgundie, notum facio omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis, quod ego habui a fratribus Longivadi centum libras Pruvinenses pro eo quod ego eisdem fratribus dedi el concessi penitus acquitavi, quicquid acquisierunt a nobili viro Symone domino Castrivillani de feodo meo in duabus villis de Dancevoy et in omnibus appenditiis earumdem villarum. Ita tamen quod si filius meus vel heres ipsius hanc donationem meam et concessionem, finito tempore avoerie sue,aliquam revocare voluerit, vel dictos fratres super hoc molestaverit, dictam pecuniam ecclesie et fratribus Longivadi ex integro reddere, tenebitur. Et sciendum quod consiliarii mei propter hoc habuerunt XX lib. provin. Ego vero teneor dictis  fratribus super hoc plenam garantiam portare quamdiu filius meus Hugo in avoeria erit. Quod ut ratum permaneat litteras istas sigiili mei munimine roboravi.  Actum anno Domini Mo CCo nono decimo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess declares that she has received a sum of 100 pounds from the monks of Longuay for her right on what they bought from Simon of Chateauvillain at Dancevoir.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.179-80, #1598..</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219