---
letter_id: "25087"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1221/1220, February )"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1221/1220, february )"
ltr_date: "1221/1220, February "
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1386.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters that lord Girard, surnamed Bojons, and his son Hugh, standing before me, released to the Cistercian house whatever they said they had of right within the boundaries of the woods of Fais, from the part of said Cistercian house, which part was conferred in alms on the Cistercian brothers by lord Eudes of good memory, formerly my husband.  From which the forenamed Gerard and Hugo, his son, had 10 pounds of Dijon money from the goods of the Cistercian house.  And both of them, Gerard as well as Hugh, confirmed with their faith placed in the hand of William of Vergy, my brother, that never will they claim anything else in said part of the woods either through themselves or through another person.  That this remain firm and unchanged in the future, at their request, I protected the present charter with the strength of my seal.  Enacted in the 1220th year of Grace in the month of February.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaydis, ducissa Burgundie, notum facio omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis quod dominus Girardus cognomento Boions, et Hugo, filius ejus, in mea presentia constituti quittaverunt domui Cistercii quicquid juris se habere dicebant infra fossata nemoris de Fais, a parte dicte domus Cistercii, que pars fratribus Cist. a bone memorie domino Odone, duce Burgundie, quondam marito meo in elemosinam est collata. Et inde habuerunt prenominiati Girardus et Hugo, filius ejus, de bonis domus Cistercii X lib. divion. monete. Et uterque tam ipse Girardus quam Hugo, filius ejus, confirmaverunt fide interposita in manu domini Willelmi de Vergeio, fratris mei, quod nunquam per se vel per aliam personam in predicta parte nemoris aliquid de cetero reclamabunt. Quod ut ratum in posterum permaneat atque  firmum, ad petitionem ipsorum presentem cartam sigilli mei robore communivi. Actum anno Gratie Mo CC° XX0, mense februario.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess makes known the donations made to the abbey of Citeaux by Girard, surnamed Bojons, and by his son Hugh.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.189-90, #.1650.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1221/1220, February 