---
letter_id: "25090"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1221/1220, April 10)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1221/1220, april 10)"
ltr_date: "1221/1220, April 10"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1389.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all that, excepting allegiance to the countess of  Chalon I received as my liege man lord William of Chapelle for what Reynald Beledenz and Parisius, chamberlain of Chalon, held from the duke of Burgundy in fief, namely for eight days in the ban(1) of Beaune and twenty pounds in the toll of Beaune, and from the men whom Robert Beledenz had at Beaune and from what he had at Ducort and in the tithe of Corgoloin, as long as said William will live and Amelina, his wife, widow of Parisius the chamberlain of Chalon.  After their deaths everything named above will revert freely and absolutely to me and my son in perpetuity, unless said William should have a son or daughter from said Amelina, who would succeed them.  Enacted in this 1220th year of the Lord, on the day after the Resurrection of the Lord.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaidis, ducissa Burgundie, omnibus notum facio quod ego salva ligietate comitisse Cabilonensis, recepi in hominem ligium dominum Willelmum de Capella, de hoc quod Renaldus Beledenz et Parisius, camerarius Cabilonensis, tenebant de duce Burgundie in feodum, scilicet de octo diebus in banno Belnensi et de viginti libris in pedagio Belnensi, et de hominibus quos Robertus Beledenz habebat apud Belnam, et de hoc quod habebat apud Ducort et in decima de Corgalein, quandiu dictus Willelmus vixerit et Amelina, uxor sua, relicta Parisii camerarii Cabillonensis. Post decessum vero eorum, totum illud quod superius est nominatum revertetur libere et absolute ad me et ad filium meum in perpetuum, nisi dictus Willelmus de dicta Amelina filium vel filiam haberet, qui eis succederet. Actum est hoc anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo, in crastino Resurrectionis Dominice.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess receives the homage of William of la Chapelle on the day after Easter.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.191, #1655.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1221/1220, April 10