---
letter_id: "25092"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1221, July)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1221, july)"
ltr_date: "1221, July"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1391.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all who will see the present writing that all the controversies that existed between the Cistercians, on one side, and Guido and Rainald, brothers from Corcelles, on the other, about the woods of Fag were settled so that in that woods the forest toll and the toll from the ascent of the Cistercians, because they are joint tenants, should be sent and remitted from the oftmentioned knights and community of Corcelles.  If, indeed, the aforesaid knights are not in the town, their agreement is to be awaited for two months.  Truly, since the woods will have been open, neither the Cistercians nor the community could sell or give or take [anything] out of the territory of Corcelles, but they have the full usage of them for their own use within the territory of Corcelles.  This composition of peace made by me, we shall have firmly observed, I, said duchess, and my son Hugh and my heirs.  Therefore that all these things remain firm and unchanged, at the request of both sides I have had my seal appended to the present page in witness of the truth and confirmation of  all the aforesaid.  Enacted at Corcelles, in the 1221st year of the Lord’s Incarnation, in the month of July.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaydis, ducissa Burgundie omnibus presentem scriptum inspecturis notum facio quod omnes controversie que vertebantur inter Cistercienses, ex una parte, et Guidonem et Rainaldum fratres de Corcellis, ex altera, de nemore de Fag, ita ordonatum est, quod in ipso nemore tam forestarius quam bannus de ascensu Cisterciensium eo quod sunt portionarii, et sepedictorum militum et communitatis de Corcellis debent mitti el remitti. Si vero predicti milites presentes non sint in villa, consensus eorum duobus mensibus est expectandus. Verum cum nemus fuerit expositum neque Cistercienses neque communitas ville poterunt vendere vel dare, vel extra territorium  de Corcellis ducere, sed ad proprios usus in territorio de Corcellis plenarium habent usamentum. Hanc autem pacis compositionem per me factam, faciemus, ego dicta ducissa et filius meus Hugo, et heredes mei, hujusce firmiter observari. Ut igitur hec omnia supradicta rata permaneant et inconcussa, ad preces utriusque partis presenti pagine sigillum meum apponi feci, in veritatis testimonium, et ad omnium predictorum confirmationem. Actum apud Corcellas, anno ab Incarnatione Domini millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo primo, mense julio.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess makes known an agreement between the lords of Corcelles and the monks of Citeaux.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.193-94, #1665.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1221, July