---
letter_id: "25093"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1222, August)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1222, august)"
ltr_date: "1222, August"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1392.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters that Peter, lord of  Palleau, standing in our presence, released the dwelling that he had in the priory and town of Combertant and whatever he had of right there, and gave and granted it in perpetual alms to the prior and monks of  that place.  Sara, wife of said lord Peter, and Hugo his son, Poncia and Estrange, daughters of the named Peter, approved this donation and release.  In witness of this thing at the request and urging of said Peter, Sara, Hugh, Poncia, and Estrange, we appended our seal to the present page.  Enacted in this 1222nd year of the Lord, in the month of August.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaidis, ducissa Burgundie, notum facimus omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis quod Petrus, dominus de Paluel, in presentia nostra consiitutus, harbergeriam quam habebat in prioratu. et villa de Corbertaldo et quicquid juris habebat ibidem quittavit et in perpetuam elemosinam dedit et concessit priori et monachis ejusdem loci. Hanc vero donationem et quittationem laudaverunt Sarra, uxor dicti domini Petri, et Hugo, filius ejusdem, Poncia et Estrange filie memorati Petri.  In hujus rei testimonium ad preces et instantiam jam dictorum scilicet Petri, Sarre, Hugonis, Poncie et Estrange, presenti pagine sigillum nostrum apposuimus.  Actum est hoc anno Domini MoCCo vicesimo secundo, mense Augusto.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Confirmation by the duchess of the donation given by Peter of Palleau, her marshal, to the prior of Combertant.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire&nbsp;Générale</em>&nbsp;<em>des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.202, #1719.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1222, August