---
letter_id: "25096"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1224)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1224)"
ltr_date: "1224"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1395.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all that when the abbot and convent of Fontenay, on one side, and lord Arnulph, knight of Eschalot, on the other, disputed in my presence and that of my agent for a long time over the woods and land-tenure and pastures and territory of Eschalot and Poiseux, it was resolved in this manner:  that said Arnulph released to said abbot and convent by his free will, according to what the charters of said brothers contained, and the brothers of Fontenay at my request released to said Arnulph  whatever he worked between the boundaries in said woods in making ash and other things.  So that said the brothers cannot acquire beyond the bounds that are contained in their charters in the portion of said Arnulph, except by the will of that same Arnulph or his heirs.  And that this may remain firm, I strengthened the present page with the protection of my seal.  Enacted in the 1224th year of the Lord.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Aalix, ducissa Burgundie, omnibus notum facio quod cum abbas et conventus Fonteneti, ex una parte, et dominus Arnulphus, miles de Eschalo, ex altera, litigassent coram me et coram mandato meo longo tempore super nemoribus et terragiis et pasturis et finagiis de Eschalo et de Poisoez, tandem pacificatum fuit in hunc modum, quod dictus Arnulphus quittavit dictis abbati et conventui voluntate spontanea, sicut carte dictorum fratrum continebant, et fratres Fonteneti ad preces meas quittaverunt dicto Arnulpho quicquid meffecerat infra metas in dictis nemoribus in cinere faciendo et in aliis. Ita tamen quod dicti fratres ultra metas que in suis cartis continentur non possunt in portione dicti Arnulphi acquirere nisi de voluntate ipsius Arnulphi vel heredum suorum. Et ut hoc ratum habeatur, presentem paginam sigilli mei munimine roboravi. Actum anno Domini M° CC° vigesimo quarto.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess settles a difference that had arisen between the monks of Fontenay and the lord of Eschalot, over the goods and donations of this village and of Poiseux.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit,<em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.217, #1798.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1224