---
letter_id: "25098"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1225, December)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1225, december)"
ltr_date: "1225, December"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1397.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters that lord Guy of Villecomte, knight, with the approval and consent of Elisabeth, his wife, and Gullelme, his sister, sold and handed over to the church of Saint-Seine for seven hundred and forty Dijon pounds whatever he had of right and said that he had at Frenois, in men and in other things, at Cuffio and Margelle, and in the territory of those towns, in woods, fields, waters, as well as other things.  Said Guy and his heirs truly are held to guarantee all that is included in this sale as described above to that church without any distress, in good faith, perpetually.  I indeed at the urging of said Guido, his wife and sister, gave my letters sealed with my seal to said church as witness.  Enacted in the 1225th year of Grace, in the month of December.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaydis, ducissa Burgundie, notum facio omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis quod dominus Guido de Villacomitis, miles, laude et assensu Elisabeth, uxoris sue, et Gullelme, sororis sue, vendidit et tradidit ecclesie S. Sequani pro septem centum et quadraginta libras Divionensium quicquid juris habebat et dicebat se habere apud Fraisnay, tam in hominibus quam in rebus aliis apud Cuffim et Margellam et in finagio earumdem villarum tam in nemoribus, planis, aquis, quam rebus aliis. Dicti vero Guido et heredes sui omnia comprehensa in venditione ista, sicut predictum est, tenentur eidem ecclesie sine vexatione aliqua, bona fide, perpetuo garantire. Ego vero ad instantiam jam dictorum Guidonis, uxoris et sororis sue, tradidi litteras meas jam dicte ecclesie in testimonium sigllo meo sigillatas. Actum anno Gratie MoCCo XXV mense decembri.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess declares that Guy of Villecomte, knight, sold to the monks of Saint-Seine for 740 pounds all that he had at Frenois, Cuffio, and Margelle, in men, and land.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.220-21, #1819..</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1225, December