---
letter_id: "23724"
title: "A letter from Emma, queen of the Franks (12/0988)"
ititle: "a letter from emma, queen of the franks (12/0988)"
ltr_date: "12/0988"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-27"
url: "/letter/14.html"
senders:
  - id: 4
    name: Emma of Italy
    iname: emma of italy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21189
    name: a priest
    iname: a priest
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>These times are bitter, priest of the Lord, in which the most holy faith everywhere grows weak.  But remember what you always promised, a promise I prefer to believe you keep.  May my captivity, the hand of plunderers, move you.  I speak to the wise.  I, that H[Emma] once queen of the Franks who ruled so many thousands, do not now have the company of slaves, who might at least accompany me to the meeting with Duke Henry [of Burgundy],(1) nor am I permitted to enjoy your desirable presence for my salvation or counsel.  Support therefore the deferring rather than the determining of our case until we can speak together about Dijon.  Do not allow your brother to be called a traitor, whom up to now we have found to persist in unfeigned loyalty.  Meanwhile, since, as you know, the agent of our things has not yet returned, nor have we heard what happened to him, do not return with an empty hand.  Bring back the long awaited money in your coffers, dispose mercy and grace for the merited benefits to be given frequently as much from this as from other [sources?].
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Acerba sunt haec tempora, sacerdos Domini, quibus sanctissima; fides usquequaque rarescit. Sed mementote illius, quam semper promisistis quamque a vobis conservandam credere malim. Moveat vos mea captivitas, praedonum manus. Apud scientem loquor. Ego illa He. quondam Francorum regina, quae tot millibus imperavi, nunc nec vernaculos comites habeo, quibus saltem stipata conventus adeam tanti ducis Henr., nec desiderabili praesentia vestra frui licet causa captandae salutis atque consilii. Adsitis ergo nostrae causae differendae, non determinandae, usque ad mutua verba de castro [Divione] dicimus. Nec patiamini fratrem vestrum dici proditorem, quem hactenus probavimus in fide non ficta permanentem. Interea quoniam adhuc  rerum nostrarum, ut scitis, procurator nec rediit nec, quid ei obvenerit, audivimus, ne vacua manu redeatis diu exspectatam pecuniam in loculis vestris referte, mercedem ac gratiam ob merita beneficia relaturi eum ex hoc tum ex aliis saepenumero collocatis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Emma writes for support from a cleric who seems to be involved in the negotiations for her release.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>(1)Henry was a brother of Hugh Capet, and together they agreed to let Emma have Dijon, which had belonged to her husband, after her release, see Lot, <em>Les Derniers Carolingiens</em>, 231.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH BDKz 2 ep.147 p.173-74, dated December 988; also in HGF10 (Gerbert) ep.27 p.394-95, PL 139 ep.147 c237-38, among letters of Gerbert, Sylvester II, before pontificate, same text.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>12/0988