---
letter_id: "25106"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1227, July)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1227, july)"
ltr_date: "1227, July"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-18"
url: "/letter/1405.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to present and future that I have conceded to the inhabitants of my castle of Saint-Jean the following freedom:

1.  First that they may choose four men who swear fidelity to the castle and its inhabitants and they may have such power and jurisdiction in the castle of Saint-Jean and its appurtenances as they have at Greater Dijon and having sworn to the commune of Dijon, except for the freedom of the castle, and those four sworn can be changed each year on the feast of St. John the Baptist and others set in their place.

2.  By proclamation he will pay twelve pennies by whom an injury will be discovered, and those twelve pennies will be to the four officials.

3.  Who will strike [someone] with fist or palm will pay, if there is an outcry, five sous, if no outcry, nothing.  Who draws blood will pay, if there is an outcry, ten sous, if no outcry, nothing.

4.  Other rights according to the good custom of Dijon will be preserved.  About tolls, sales, and other good customs which are held in the town of Dijon, I grant freedom to them. 

5.  For their vineyards, I concede such liberty that if I place my guards near Dijon when the vines are ready they will be able to harvest them freely for the vintage.

6.  For my woods, truly, I concede such freedom of whatever will be necessary to their work in the castle of Saint-Jean according to the usage and custom they have had up to now.

7.  I want those whom I have retained or shall retain within the protective covering (?) of my castle of Saint-Jean to be free with all their possessions.

8.  If anyone is outside of those living in said castle he may receive and act on his right in the castle before the four chosen [representatives/officials].

9.  Item.  My provost of Saint-Jean will have no power or jurisdiction over men living there or their possessions, nor [will] our other provosts or bailiffs, except through the four chosen.

10. Whoever might wish or be able to take refuge in the castle unless he be a thief or murderer, will be free and secure in the castle with all his possessions. 

11. And whoever will build in the castle can do his will in the building, except for our rent.

12.  I have also conceded to the inhabitants of my castle of Saint-Jean that they be free from all tolls, charges, exactions, and commissions, except that each will pay ten sous annually for each pertica [16 to 25.5 feet] of land width.

13. Item if animals or cattle are caught in the forest each animal will incur six pennies;  and the sheep among them will give two pennies and damages, in the opinion of the four chosen, will be restored to the one harmed.

14.  And it is to be known that the judging of a thief, adulterer and homicide is to be retained by them,  namely who are proved or convicted in the castle of Saint-Jean and its bailiwick.

I, duchess of Burgundy, have sworn to observe firmly and inviolably the constitutions, liberties and immunities of  this kind as contained in the present charter.  I wish also that any successor of mine in the duchy confirm and swear to the same.  This charter was emended and confirmed, strengthened  by my seal at the request of my men of Saint-Jean.  Enacted in the one thousand two hundred twenty seventh year of the Lord, in the month of July.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaids ducissa Burgundie notum facio presentibus et futuris quod ego concessi habitatoribus castri mei Sancti Johannis talem libertatem.

1. ln primis ut eligant quatuor homines qui jurent fidelitatem castri et habitantium in eo et talem habeant potestatem et juridictionem in castro Sancti Johannis et in appenditiis suis qualem habent apud Divionem Maior et jurati communie Divionis, salva tamen castri libertate, et illi quatuor jurati possunt mutari per singulos annos in festo beati Johannis Baptiste et alii constitui. 

2. De proclamatione duodecim denarios persolvet super quem injuria reperietur, et illi duodecim denarii erunt quatuor scabinorum. 

3. Qui de pugno vel palma percusserit, si inde clamor exierit, quinque solidos solvet si clamor non exierit, nichil. Qui sanguinem fecerit, si clamor exierit decem solidos persolvet si clamor non exierit, nichil. 

4. Alia jura secundum bonam consuetudinem Divionis conservabuntur. De pedagiis, de vantis, et de aliis bonis consuetudinibus que tenentur in villa Divionis, eis libertatem concedo. 

5. De vineis suis, talem sibi concedo libertatem quod si custodes meos circa Divionem posuero quando vinee parate erunt ad vendemiandum libere potuerunt vendemiare. 

6. De nemoribus vero meis, concedo eis quicquid ad omne opus suum eis in castro Sancti Johannis necesse fuerit secundum usus et consuetudines, que usque nunc habuerunt. 

7. Volo autem ut illi quos in actractu castri mei Sancti Johannis retinui vel retinuero liberi sint cum omnibus rebus suis. 

8. Si quis autem exterior de manentibus in dicto castro, jus recipiat et faciat in castro coram quatuor electis. 

9. Item. Prepositus meus de Sancto Johanne nullam habebit potestatem vel juridicionem in hominibus ibidem manentibus vel in rebus eorum, neque alii prepositi nostri vel ballivi, nisi per quatuor electos .

10. Quicumque in castro refugere voluerit vel potuerit nisi latro vel homicida fuerit, liber et securus erit in castro cum omnibus rebus suis. 

11 Et quicumque in castro edifficaverit de edificio voluntatem suam facere poterit, salva censa nostra. 

 12. Concessi eciam habitatoribus castri mei Sancti Johannes ut liberi sint ab omnibus tailliis, exactionibus, questionibus et missionibus, excepto quod quisque de quaque pertica mansi sui de lato annuatim decem solidos persolvet. Et ab omnibus exercitibus meis immunes erunt. 

13. Item si animalia vel pecora in foresto deprehensa fuerint quodlibet animal sex denarios persolvet; prêter oves quarum queque duos denarios dabit, et dampnum, ad considerationem quatuor electorum, illi cui factum fuerit restituetur. 

14. Et sciendum quod justiciam latronis, adulterii et homicide retinui eorum, videlicet qui in Castro Sancti Johannis et ballivia ejus probati fuerint vel convicti. 

Ego autem ducissa Burgundie, hujus modi constitutiones, libertates et immunitates firmiter et inviolabiliter observandas sicut in presenti carta continetur juravi. Volo autem ut quicumque successor meus in ducatu fuerit hoc idem confirmet et juret. Carta ista emendata et confirmata fuit et sigillo meo roborata ad petitionem hominum meorum de Sancto Johanne. Actum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo vicesimo septimo, mense juIio. 


<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess approves and ratifies the charter of the freeing of her men from the castle of Saint-Jean-de-Losne, conforming to that of the inhabitants of Talant, agreed to previously by duke Eudes III, her husband.




<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Joseph Garnier, <em>Chartes de Communes et d'affranchisements en Bourgogne</em> (Dijon: Rabutat, 1867-77). 2.7-10.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1227, July