---
letter_id: "25115"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1234, June)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1234, june)"
ltr_date: "1234, June"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1414.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy. make known to all that Milo of Vergy, son of Achard, acknowledged in my presence that he had no right in the patrimony of Henry, provost of Saint Seine, in which he said he had a right against the abbey of Saint Seine; and if he had any right, he released it absolutely and of his free will.  In witness of which, at the request of said Milo, I handed over to the lord abbot of Saint Seine the present charter fortified with the protection of my seal.  Enacted in the 1234th year of the Lord in the month of June.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaidis, ducissa Burguudie, omnibus notum facio quod Milo de Vergeio, filius Achardi, cognovit in mea presentia quod nullum jus habebat in escatura Henrici, prepositi de Sancto Sequano, in quo dicebat se jus habere erga abbatiam S. Sequani; et si aliquod jus habebat, ipse quittavit absolute et spontanea voluntate.  In cujus rei testimonium ad petitionem dicti Milonis domino abbati S. Sequani tradidi presentem cartam sigilli mei munimine roboratam. Actum anno Domini M° CC° XXX° IV° mense junio.



<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess attests that Milo of Vergy declared he had no rights in the patrimony of the provost of Saint Seine.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.276-77, #2136.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1234, June