---
letter_id: "25122"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1242, May)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1242, may)"
ltr_date: "1242, May"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1421.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Alix, mother of the duke of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters, that lord Hugo of Meaux (?Moncials), knight standing in my presence, gave and conceded to the church of St. Mary of Lieu-Dieu and the nuns serving God there in pure and perpetual alms for the salvation of the soul of lord Hugo, her brother, and the souls of their ancestors, whatever she had at Boncourt, except for two bushels of grain.  In witness of which I sealed the present letters with my seal.  Enacted in the 1242nd year of the Lord in the month of May.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Alaydis, ducissa mater ducis Burgundie, notum facio omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis quod dominus Hugo de Moncials, miles, in mea presentia constitutus dedit et concessit ecclesie Beate Marie Loci Dei et sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo servientibus in puram et perpetuam elemosinam, ob remedium anime domini Huonis, fratris sui, et animarum antecessorum suorum, quicquid habebat apud Boncort, exceptis duobus bossellis bladi. In cujus rei testimonium presentes litteras sigillo meo sigillavi. Actum anno Domini M° CC° quadragesimo secundo, mense maio.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess makes known a donation made to nuns of Lieu-Dieu.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.331, #2433..</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1242, May