---
letter_id: "25123"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1243, April)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1243, april)"
ltr_date: "1243, April"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1422.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We, Alix, duchess, mother of Hugh, duke of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters that Guy, called Morestaz, standing in our presence, acknowledged that he had sold, with the approval and consent and will of his wife and of Thibaut, Perret, and Berter, his brothers, to the abbess and convent of Lieu-Dieu a certain vineyard situated in the territory of  Nuits, in Champroux, between the vineyard of Danguierre, on one side, and the vineyard of Valo, called Enraige on the other, and to have received so much in cash (numbered money) that he held himself paid fully and satisfactorily.  Said Guy and his brothers, truly, on a bodily oath, promised they would not go against said sale nor otherwise permit anyone to oppose it, but would observe it in every way, and said Guy and his heirs hold themselves to guarantee said vineyard in good faith against all.  In witness of which thing at the entreaties of said brothers, we had our seal appended to the present letters.  Enacted in the 1243rd year of the Lord in the month of April.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Nos Alaydis ducissa, mater Hugonis ducis Burgundie, notum facimus universis presentes litteras inspecturis quod Guido, dictus Morestaz, in presentia nostra constitutus, recognovit se vendidisse, laude et assensu et voluntate uxoris sue et Theobaldi, Perreti et Berteri, fratrum suorum, abbatisse et conventui Loci Dei quandam vineam sitam in territorio de Nuyz, en Champrossial, inter vineam Danguierre, ex una parte, et vineam Valonis, dicti Enraige, ex altera, et tantum recepisse in pecunia numerata quod se tenebat pro pagato et plenarie pro contento. Dictus vero Guido et fratres sui, corporali prestito juramento, promiserunt se contra dictam venditionem de cetero non ire nec aliquem permittent contraire, sed ipsam modis omnibus observare, et dictus Guido et heredes sui tenentur bona fide contra omnes dictam vineam garantire. In cujus rei testimonium ad preces supradictorum fratrum, presentibus litteris sigillum nostrum fecimus apponi.  Actum anno Domini MoCCoXL tertio, mense aprilis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess makes known a sale to the nuns of Lieu-Dieu.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.336-37, #2461.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1243, April