---
letter_id: "25130"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy (1250/1249, March)"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy (1250/1249, march)"
ltr_date: "1250/1249, March"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/1429.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We, Alix, duchess, mother of the duke of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters that Odo of Chaux, knight, standing in our presence, gave and handed over to God and St. Mary of Lieu-Dieu and the nuns serving God there in pure and perpetual alms, for the salvation of his soul and his ancestors’, twelve acres (jugera) of land situated in the territory of Chaux, in the area that is called Crae, of which two are located next to the granary of said nuns, free usage in all pastures, waters, exits and entries, and fencings, in the whole territory of Chaux, for use of the nuns and their people, household as well as animals.  This donation was made with the approval and consent of Margaret, the wife of said Odo, and his sons, namely Simon, Peter, and Stephen.  And that this be held established and firm in the future, at the entreaties of  said Odo, Margaret, his wife, and his sons, we have handed over the present page to the said nuns strengthened by the protection of our seal.  Enacted in the 1249th year of the Lord in the month of March.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Nos Alaydis ducissa, mater ducis Burgundie, notum facimus universis presentes litteras inspecturis quod Odo de Chauz, miles, in presentia nostra constitutus, concessit, dedit et tradidit Deo et Beate Marie Loci Dei et Sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo servientibus, in puram et perpetuam elemosinam, pro remedio anime sue et antecessorum suorum, duodecim jugera terre site in territorio de Chauz, in finagio quod dicitur Crae, quorum duo sita sunt juxta grangiam dictarum Sanctimonialium, liberum usagium in omnibus pascuis, aquis, egressibus et ingressibus, palustribus, in toto territorio de Chauz, ad opus ipsarum et suorum tam familie quam animalium. Hec autem donatio facta est laude et assensu Margarete, uxoris dicti Odonis, et filiorum suorum, videlicet Symonis, Petri et Stephani. Et ut hoc ratum et firmum in posterum habeatur, ad preces supradictorum Odonis, Margarete, uxoris ejus, et filiorum suorum presentem paginam tradidimus supradictis sanctimonialibus sigilli nostri munimine roborata .  Actum anno Domini MoCCo quadragesimo nono, mense marcio.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The duchess makes known a donation to the nuns of Lieu-Dieu by Odo of Chaux.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>E. Petit, <em>Histoire Generale des Ducs de Bourgogne&nbsp;</em><i>de la race Capétienne&nbsp;</i>(Dijon: Darentiere, 1885-1905), 6v., 4.382-83, #2662.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1250/1249, March