---
letter_id: "25153"
title: "A letter from and Bernard Ato V (1146)"
ititle: "a letter from and bernard ato v (1146)"
ltr_date: "1146"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-29"
url: "/letter/1452.html"
senders:
  - id: 169
    name: Guillelma of Montpellier
    iname: guillelma of montpellier
    type: woman
    url: /woman/169.html
  - id: 21227
    name: Bernard Ato V
    iname: bernard ato v
    type: people
    url: /people/21227.html
receivers:
  - id: 21631
    name: William of Radico
    iname: william of radico
    type: people
    url: /people/21631.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the year 1146 from the Incarnation of the lord in the reign of king Louis.  I Bernard-Ato viscount of Nimes and I Guillelma his wife for us, etc., give as a fief without deceit to you William of Radico and your brothers Bremund and Pons …. our garriga [probably market-day fee, though it can also mean an oak forest] which we have over the town of Radico in a place which is called Vallis-Boisete and is contiguous etc., we give it to you namely by such a pact that you and your successors give to us and our successors each year on the feast of St. Michael two capons from the annual rent and because of this donation we have 10 Melgueil sous from you.  This was done in the presence of Francis and Bernard Raymond of Arenes, and William Christopher, and Follacher.  Peter wrote it.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Anno ab Incarnatione domini MCXLVI regnante Lodoico rege. Ego Bernardus-Atonis vicecomes Nemausensis & ego Guillelma uxor ejus per nos, &c. damus ad beneficium sine dolo tibi Guillelmo de Radico & fratribus tuis Breundo & Pontio….nostram garrigam quam habemus super villam de Radico, in loco qui vocatur vallis Boisete, & confrontat, &c. tali videlicet pacto damus vobis ut vos & successores vestri nobis & successoribus nostris in unoquoque anno in festivitate sancti Michaelis inde donetis de censu II capones, & propter hanc donationem habemus a vobis x solidos Melgorienses. Hoc est factum in praesentia Francisci & Bernardi Raimundi de Arenis, & Guillelmi Christophori, & Follacherii. Petrus scripsit.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Record of a fief, probably consisting of the right to collect a fee, bestowed by Guillelma and her husband. The text is not complete. The content also appears in a chirograph in Teulet, <em>Layettes</em>, 1.62 #95.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Devic and Vaissette, <em>Histoire <em>Générale&nbsp;</em>de Languedoc</em> (Toulouse: Privat, 1875) 5.1075, #559.4,</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1146