---
letter_id: "25155"
title: "A letter from Guillelma of Montpellier (1166, January)"
ititle: "a letter from guillelma of montpellier (1166, january)"
ltr_date: "1166, January"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-29"
url: "/letter/1454.html"
senders:
  - id: 169
    name: Guillelma of Montpellier
    iname: guillelma of montpellier
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21627
    name: William of Gallina
    iname: william of gallina
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the year 1166 from the Incarnation of the Lord, in the month of January.  I Guillelma viscountess of Nimes for me and for my son the viscount and I Bremond of Vezenobre  (who am) the steward of William of Montpelliers, (we) approve and concede without deception to you William of Gallina and all your successors, namely all the fief which you hold from the viscount, which Benedicta your [paternal] aunt gave you, which fief  is in the territory of Corbesatis, namely five pieces of land which are in the Creuse valley, in which they have 3 sestars and 8 pieces of vineyard in which they have half a quarter and 2 pieces at St. Liziere and 2 pieces of land with the trees that are there which lands are at Corbesatis.  For said vineyards and lands of Corbesatis they give 1 penny of rent with the other heirs and nothing else; for the lands from the valley of Creuse a tax and for the trees from the estate of  Avalsender a quarter.  I viscountess Guilelma approve to you William of Gallina the land which is in the investiture of St. John, saving the viscount’s, and one capon of rent for the whole aforesaid fief.  And because of this approval we have 8 Melgueil sous from you.  This was done in the presence of Adalbert and Poritio of Gallina, Raymond Celestis, Peter Samuel, Bernard Provincial, William Rainald.  Peter of Rodez wrote [it].
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Anno ab Incarnatione Domini MCLXVI, in mense januario.  Ego Guilelma vicecomitissa Nemausensis per me & per filium meum vicecomitem & ego Bremundus de Vedenobrio qui sum bajulus Guilelmi de Montepessulano laudamus & concedimus sine dolo tibi Guillelmo Galline & omnibus successoribus tuis, scilicet omnem honorem quem tenes de vicecomite, quem Benedicta amita tua dedit tibi, qui honor est in terminio de Corbesatis, scilicet v pecias de terra, que sunt in valle Crosa, in quibus habent III sestairatas & VIII pecias de vinea in quibus habent mediam cartariatam & II pecias ad Licherias & II pecias de terra cum arboribus que ibi sunt, quas terras sunt ad Corbesatis. Vineas predictas & terras de Corbessatis donant I denarium de censu cum aliis heredibus & non aliud; terras de valle Crosa donant tascham & arbores de podio Avalsender & donant carteriam. Ego Guilelma vicecomitissa laudo tibi Guilelmo Galline terram, que est in vestitu Sancti Johannis, salvam tam vicecomitis & unum caponem de censu pro toto honore predicto. Et propter hanc laudationem habuimus a te VIII solidos Melgorienses. Hoc est factum in presentia Aldeberti & Poritii Galline, Raimundi Celestis, Petri Samuelis, Bernardi Provincialis, Guilelmi Rainaldini. Petrus de Rothenis scripsit.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The viscountess approves the holding of an inherited fief for certain fees.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Devic and Vaissette, <em>Histoire</em> <em>Générale&nbsp;de Languedoc</em> (Toulouse: Privat, 1875) 5.1299-1300, #667.1.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1166, January