---
letter_id: "25158"
title: "A letter from Pons of Vezenobre (1166)"
ititle: "a letter from pons of vezenobre (1166)"
ltr_date: "1166"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-09"
url: "/letter/1457.html"
senders:
  - id: 21520
    name: Pons of Vezenobre
    iname: pons of vezenobre
    type: people
    url: /people/21520.html
receivers:
  - id: 169
    name: Guillelma of Montpellier
    iname: guillelma of montpellier
    type: woman
    url: /woman/169.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Pons of Vezenobre, put myself in the power of you, my lord, viscount B[ernard] Ato, and you, my lady, viscountess Guillelma; for the complaint of the court and the sedition committed with my neighbors, I shall do what your court will have determined.  I promise this for myself and for all my supporters, and for those who are of our fellowship, from the least to the greatest; and for this I shall give pledges previously-agreed of five thousand sous and more pledges at the determination of the court; and I shall be and remain wherever it pleases your court, until your various complaints and the sedition committed with the hostile side, are ended by a judgment or another means.  And if the agreements are changed, I shall always preserve what was said at your determination and I shall hold and keep all the aforesaid.  So God help me and these four holy Gospels. – Fasian, Mariol, Godfrey Vituli, R. de Brodito, Portarades, W. de Vilario, B. de Chaumes, Gerald of Clarencia and Bertrand William, all swore this. – It also happened afterwards that on the eve of St. John the Baptist the lady viscountess received from this party 8 horses in the name of pledges; but, since the Lord viscount was not present, the lady viscountess deferred the day of the case, and in her own voice, in the hearing of all, on her part and that of her son gave surety among them.  Indeed Pons of Vezenobre and R. de Brodito and Fasian swore again that they would keep and fulfill all that was prescribed, and gave pledges as bail.

On the other side they swore in the same way and to these pacts:  R. de Monte-mirato, W. of Arenes, P. de Porta-veteri, W. shield-bearer of Monte-mirato, P.B. Grataserps, Ralph, Pons de Clausonna, Redorta, Raymond of Vacheriis and Chauzoardus.  And similarly, on the eve of St. John the Baptist,  they gave 8 horses in the name of pledges; and the lady viscountess, in her own voice, in the hearing of all, on the part of herself and her son, gave surety between them.  – R. de Monte-mirato, Porta vetus and W. of Arenes again swore that they would keep and fulfill all that was prescribed and offered pledges as bail.


<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Poncius de Vicenobrio mitto me in potestatem tui domini mei Bernardi Atonis vicecomitis & tui domine mee Guillelme vicecomitisse & faciam de clamoribus curie & de seditione facta cum affinibus meis quod curia vestra cognoverit. Hoc promitto pro me & pro omnibus auxiliantibus mihi & pro his qui sunt de nostro consortio a minimo usque ad majorem, & de hoc reddam pignora ante placita V milium solidorum & plus pignorum, ad cognitionem curie; & stabo & permanebo ubicumque curie vestre placuerit quoad usque cuncti clamores vestri & seditio facta cum adversa parte aut sentencia aut alio modo terminentur; & si placita mutata fuerint, semper servabo quod predictum est ad vestram cognitionem, et hec omnia predicta firma tenebo & servabo.  Sic me Deus adjuvet & hec sancta IIII Evuangelia.--  Fasianus, Maroiolus, Guaufredus Vituli, R. de Brodito, Portarades, W. de Vilario, B. de Calmis, Guiraldus de Clarenciaco & Bertrandus Guillelmus; omnes isti juraverunt.  Hoc  idem contigit postea quod in vigilia sancti Johannis Baptiste domina vicecomitissa recepit ab hac parte VIII equos nomine pignorum; sed quoniam dominus et vicecomes presens non erat, distulit diem cause domina vicecomitissa & voce propria omnibus audientibus ex parte sua & filii sui dedit securitatem inter eos. P0ncius vero de Vicenobrio, & R. de Brodito & Fasianus omnia prescripta juraverunt iterum se servare & complere & manlevaverunt pignora.

Ex altera parte juraverunt eodem modo & eisdem pactis R. de Montemirato, W. de Arenis, P. de Portaveteri, W. de Montemirato scuderius, P. B. Grataserps, Radulfus, Poncius de Clausonna Redoria, Raimundus de Vacheriis & Chauzoardus; & similiter in vigilia sancti Johannis Baptiste reddiderunt VIII equos nomine pignorum; & domina vicecomitissa voce propria omnibus audientibus ex parte sua & filii sui dedit securitatem inter eos. R. de Montemirato, Portavetus & W. de Arenis omnia prescripta juraverunt iterum se servare &: complere & manlevaverunt pignora.




<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Pons of Vezenobre atones for his revolt with pledges and promises to Bernard Ato and his mother Guillelma.  The text in Teulet includes more oath-takers and their pledges.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Teulet, <em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes,</em> 1.92-93, #202 and Devic and Vaissette, HGL, &nbsp;5.1301-02, #667.4.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1166