---
letter_id: "25172"
title: "A letter from Melisende, queen of Jerusalem (1150, June 22)"
ititle: "a letter from melisende, queen of jerusalem (1150, june 22)"
ltr_date: "1150, June 22"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-12"
url: "/letter/1471.html"
senders:
  - id: 30
    name: Melisende of Jerusalem
    iname: melisende of jerusalem
    type: woman
    url: /woman/30.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the Father and Son and Holy Spirit, amen.  From the legal traditions of the preceding fathers, the very well known custom of the moderns was built who, so that they their studies or works or whatever can be ordered, have been accustomed to commend to the tenacious memory of writing with brevity of style what is impossible to slip from the memory of those present and future, and may scarcely be removed by odious oblivion, and the successors of the predecessors adorn themselves with their customs and are strengthened.  So I, Melisende, by the grace of God queen of Jerusalem, conforming to my predecessors, whatever example I dispose to give I wish to be commended to the page for those who follow us.  Among others, with the approval of my barons, I make or approve the sale to the lepers of St. Lazarus, by the Syrian Mozzageth, I approved and granted it and confirmed it with the fortification of my seal, namely four measures (carrucatas) of vineyard in the plain of Bethlehem; said brothers of St. Lazarus bestowed a thousand bezants of their own and one horse in our presence.   Witnesses of this confirmation are:  lord Amalric, son of the queen, Rohard Bencellinus, viscount,  lord Philip of Nablus, Manasses, constable, John, scribe, Erneis, chancellor of the patriarch, Fulk of Gerin, Nicholas, chamberlain, John of Valenciennes, Britius, Herbert Lombard, Petres of Pirregort, Herbert Strabo, Rainald Sechir, Peter Salomon, Senoreth the tailor, Petros.  In the year 1150 from the incarnation of the Lord, indiction 13, in the reign of Baldwin, fourth king of the Latins.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti, amen. Ex precedentium patrum traditionibus legitimis modernorum molevit consuetudo celeberrima, qui ut studia sua vel opera seu quecumque disponi possunt scripti memorie tenaci commendare sub stili brevitate consueverunt, quatinus tam presentium quam futurorum a memoria elabi sit impossibile, et odiosa oblivio penitus excurpari valeat, et successores precessorum suorum moribus se adornent et corroborentur. Ego itaque MILESENDIS, Dei gratia Jerusalem regina, predecessoribus me conformans, quecumque agere dispono scedulis commandari volo posteris nostris exemplum. Inter cetera vero cum laudamento baronum meorum fatio vel laudo, venditionem leprosis de Sancto Lazaro, a MOZZAGETH suriano factam, laudavi et concessi et sigilli mei munimine confirmavi, quatuor videlicet pieces vinee in piano Bethleem, predicti vero Sancti Lazari fratres de suo proprio mille bisancios et concum cum equo uno presentie nostre largiti sunt.  HUJUS AUTEM CONFIRMATIONIS TESTES SUNT: DOMINUS Amalricus, REGINE FILIUS; DOMINUS Rohardus Bencellinus, VICECOMES; DOMINUS Philippus DE Neapoli; Manasses, CONSTABULARLUS; Iohannes SCRIBA; Erneis, PATRIARCHE CANCELLARIUS; Fulco DE Gerin; Nicholaus, CAMERARIUS; Iohannes DE Valancienes; Britius; Herbertus Longobardus; Petres DE Pirregort; Herbertus Strabo; Rainaldus Sechir; Petrus Salomon; Senoreth LI Palmentirs; Petros. ANNO AB INCARNATIONE DOMINI  MCL, INDICTIONE XIII, REGNANTE Baldewino, REGE LATINORUM QUARTO. 


<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Melisende, queen of Jerusalem, confirms the sale to the lepers of St. Lazarus of four carrucatas (a carrucata is about 35 hectars), in the plains of Bethlehem outside the walls of Jerusalem by the Syrian Mazageth, for 1100 bezants and a horse with the approval of “my” barons.  On the same date, Baldwin III confirmed the purchase of 13 carrucas of vineyard in the plains of Bethlehem to the brothers of St. Lazarus by the Syrian chief Melangano for 1050 bezants and a horse, without mention of the queen, RRH #258. The two charters presumably refer to the same sale, despite the discrepancy in the amount of land between the two documents.  Mayer (144-45) puts Melisende’s confirmation first, noting that Baldwin’s is based on hers; he suggests that the new owners requested one from the king as well. 




<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Archives de l’Orient latin</em>, Société&nbsp;de l’Orient Latin (Paris: E. Leroux, 1881-84), v.2 B.128-29, #8, RRH #259.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1150, June 22