---
letter_id: "25177"
title: "A letter from Baldwin and (1155, June 27)"
ititle: "a letter from baldwin and (1155, june 27)"
ltr_date: "1155, June 27"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-09"
url: "/letter/1476.html"
senders:
  - id: 30
    name: Melisende of Jerusalem
    iname: melisende of jerusalem
    type: woman
    url: /woman/30.html
  - id: 21226
    name: Baldwin
    iname: baldwin
    type: people
    url: /people/21226.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the holy and individual Trinity of the Father and Son and Holy Spirit, amen.  Let it be known to all, present and future, that I, Baldwin, by the grace of God fourth king of the Latins in holy Jerusalem, with the consent of queen Melisende, that is my mother, and at the will of Amalric, my brother, count of Ascalon,  (I) grant, commend and approve the exchange made in the time of lord Fulk, my father, illustrious king of Jerusalem, between the patrician [John] and the canons of the Lord’s Sepulchre of two villages, namely Megina and Mezera, with all their appurtenances for two other villages of the Holy Sepulchre, Cafermelich and Anquina, similarly with all their appurtenances.  Which exchange Babinus, from whom John held his fief, granted and approved in the presence of us and the lady queen; Petros also, his kinsman, granted that exchange; Bruna also, the wife of John, and his sons, Thomas and Eustache, assented to the exchange; on such condition, namely, that if any charge should arise in the future over the aforesaid exchange of villages, that John, the agent of the exchange, and his heirs to whom his heredity would pass after him, would be held perpetually obligated to the church of the Holy Sepulchre so that whatever harm might occur to the canons of said church because of the charge brought, would be restored in full to the church and its convent according to the estimation of good men.  Truly since in the time of lord Fulk, the king, my father, the previously agreed exchange could not reach a proper and peaceful end as pleased the said church of the Lord’s Sepulchre because of certain controversies that emerged on the part of John, (I) now perceive the matter and the business resolved peacefully on all sides, who was present also when the exchange was made and after from those about whom I spoke above I heard the exchange was granted and approved, I hold it firm and fixed and strongly affirm it, and for the salvation of my soul and of my parents, living and dead, lest anyone ever have the temerity to seek to weaken this exchange and confirmation, I confirm and reinforce the present page of exchange and confirmation with the application of my seal, so that from my care the forenamed church of the Lord’s Sepulchre may have the wherewithal to pray almighty God by right in holy places for me who confirms the said exchange.  This was done in the year 1155 from the incarnation of the Lord, indiction 3.  Witnesses of this thing are:   Andreas of Mount Barr, master of the Temple, Humfred, constable, Philip of Nablus, Guido his brother, French, Hugo of Hybelino, Odo of St. Amand, Isaac, castellan of the tower of David, William of Barr, Galvan of La Roche (Rochia?), Robert Asinus, Thomas of Satorono.  Given at Jerusalem by the hand of Ralph, chancellor, 5 calends of July.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine sancte et individue Trinitatis Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti, amen. Notum sit omnibus, tam presentibus quam futuris, quod ego Balduinus, per gratiam Dei in sancta Iherusalem Latinorum rex quartus, assensu Milisendis regine, matris siquidem mee, necnon et Amalrici, fratris mei, comitis Ascalonitani, nutu, concedo, laudo et approbo commutationem tempore domni Fulconis, patris mei, regis Iherosolimorum illustris, inter [Iohannem] Patricium et canonicos Dominici Sepulcri factam de duobus casalibus, Megina scilicet et Mezera, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis pro duobus aliis Sancti Sepulcri casalibus, Cafermelich et Anquina, cum suis similiter pertinentiis. Quam commutationem Babinus, a quo idem Iohannes feodum suum tenebat, concessit et in nostra dominice regine approbavit presentia; Petrosus quoque, cognatus eiusdem, ipsam concessit factam commutationem; Bruna etiam, uxor Iohannis, ac filii eius, Thomas et Eustachius facte assensere commutationi; tali videlicet conditione ut, si qua in posterum super prefata[m] casalium commutationem quorumlibet oriretur calumpnia, ipse lohannes, commutationis actor, et herede eius ac illi, ad quos hereditas ipsius transient post ipsum, ecclesie Sancti Sepulcri obligati perpetuo tenerentur ut, quicquid dampni propter motam calumpniam ecclesie prefate canonicis contigerit, sub estimatione bonorum virorum ecclesie et eiusdem conventui in integrum restauretur. Verum quoniam in tempore domni Fulconis regis, patris videlicet mei, propter quasdam emergentes ex parte Iohannis controversias commutatio pretaxata, prout predicte Dominici Sepulcri ecclesie placuit, debitum ac pacificum finem sortiri non potuit, [ego], qui modo rem et negocium ex omni parte positum in pace conspicio, qui etiam commutationi facte interfui, et postmodum ab illis, de quibus supra dixi, commutationem concessam et collaudatam audivi, eam firmam et ratam teneo et vivaciter affirmo, ac pro salute anime mee et parentum meorum, tam vivorum quam defunctorum, ne quandoque temeritate alicuius commutatio et confirmatio hec infirmari queat, presentem paginam commutationis et confirmationis modum continentem sigilli mei appositione confirmo et corroboro, quatenus ex mea cura prenominata Dominici Sepulcri ecclesie habeat unde pro me, qui commutationem iam tociens dictam confirmo, coram locis sanctis Deum omnipotentem iure exorare debeat.  Factum est autem hoc anno ab incarnatione Domini MCLV, indictione III. Huius quidem rei testes sunt :   Andreas de Monte Barro, magister Templi. Humfredus, constabularius. Philippus Neapolitanus. Guido, frater eius, Francigena. Hugo de Ybelino. Odo de Sancto Amando. Ysaac, castellanus turris David. Guillelmus de Barra. Galvannus de Rochia. Robertus Asinus. Thomas de Satorono. Data Iherosolimis, per manum Radulfi cancellarii, v kalendas iulii.


<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Baldwin III, king of Jerusalem, with the consent of Melisende, confirms and approves a long pending exchange of two pairs of villages described in RRH#200, between a noble and the canons of the Lord’s Sepulchre.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Roziere, Eugène de, <em>Cartulaire de l’Eglise du St. Sepulchre</em> (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1849), 93-95, #51, RRH #306.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1155, June 27