---
letter_id: "25179"
title: "A letter from Baldwin III and (1156)"
ititle: "a letter from baldwin iii and (1156)"
ltr_date: "1156"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-12"
url: "/letter/1478.html"
senders:
  - id: 30
    name: Melisende of Jerusalem
    iname: melisende of jerusalem
    type: woman
    url: /woman/30.html
  - id: 26179
    name: Baldwin III, king of Jerusalem
    iname: baldwin iii, king of jerusalem
    type: people
    url: /people/26179.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the holy and individual Trinity of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.  Amen.   Let it be known to all present and future that I, Baldwin, by the grace of God fourth king of the Latins in holy Jerusalem, with the advice and concession of my mother queen Melisende, make peace in this way with the Pisans.  The Pisans for themselves and all their men dismiss all the complaints on all matters which were brought by them against me the King and all my men, which up to this day they could bring against me and my men in any way, except those which they might bring over their fiefs against the Lord Patriarch of Jerusalem and the clergy of Caesarea, and the Abbot and monks of St. Mary of Latina.  And I, the King, for myself and all my men, dismiss all the complaints on all things which up to this day I might bring against them and their men in any way.  The Pisans, moreover, and their men render me the King safe and sure and all my men, in person and in their things on sea and on land take care not to permit offenses against me or my men by strangers.   And I, the king, and my men render the Pisans safe and faithful, in their persons and possessions on sea and on land, and take care not to permit offense against them by strangers. But I except those whom my men found carrying iron or wood or pitch or arms to be sold in the land of Egypt.  If my men should take such things away from them, the peace would not be therefore broken. Moreover I, the King, give the Pisans a viscount in Tyre, who should judge the Pisans in their own court.  But I reserve that I judge the plaints of my court according to my justice and principles.  I also pay the Pisans five carrucatas [a carrucata is about 35 hectars] of good earth near Tyre and one oven in Tyre. But I render and confirm to them whatever Lord King Baldwin, of good memory, my grandfather, formerly granted the Pisans in Tyre, or in his kingdom, and corroborated by royal pirivilege/charter, which contains them.  So we grant the Pisans five houses in Tyre on the street near the port, clear of all tribute or payment in perpetual hereditary right to be sold or given into the possession of whomever they wish.  Their ships, security and business which was brought into Tyre or taken out, except Pilgrims, and men other than the merchants of the Pisans or their business in Tyre is similarly free and clear of all rent and gift.  Moreover if any of the Pisans in the whole kingdom of Jerusalem should die, his things would be free and returned to his family or people.  It also pleases me that Amalric, my brother, count of Ascalon, be at peace with the Pisans.  These agreements, therefore, which I mentioned above of peace between me and the Pisans and my men and their men, I approve and grant to be formed and preserved in perpetuity, with God willing, and I order them to be fortified by the subscribed witnesses and the impression of my seal.  This was done in the year 1157 from the Incarnation of the Lord, Indiction 5.  Witnesses of the aforesaid peace are: Bertran of Brancafort, master of the Knights Templar, Galfred Fulcher, one of the knights of the Temple, brother Gerald of Hugo, preceptor of the Hospital, brother William of Grosseto, Amalric, count of Ascalon, Robert of Porta, Rainald the Falconer.  Given at Acre by the hand of Ralph, bishop of Bethlehem and chancellor of the king, 4th nones of November.  I Albagnan judge and notary of the Roman Emperor Lord Frederick  and Chancellor of the city of Pisa, saw this original document, read it and subscribed/signed.  I Albert, judicial magistrate of Lord Frederick, Roman Emperor and notary, saw this original document, read it, and here subscribed.  I Hildebrand, judicial magistrate of the Lord Frederick Roman Emperor and notary saw this original document, read it, and here subscribed.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In Nomine Sanctae et Individue Trinitatis Patris, et Filij, et Spiritus Sancti.  Amen.  Notum sit omnibus tam praesentibus, quam futuris, quod ego Balduinus per gratiam Dei in Sanctam Ierusalem Latinorum Rex Quartus consilio, et concessione Melisendis Reginae Matris siquidem meae Pacem in hunc modum facio cum Pisanis.  Pisani itaque per se, et per suos omnes homines quaerelas universas omnium rerum, quae eis ablatae sunt mihi Regi, et omnibus meis hominibus dimittunt, quas usque ad diem hanc contra me, atque meos homines aliquo modo intendere poterant, exceptis his, quas de honoribus suis contra Dom. Hierosolimitanum Patriarcham, et Clericatum Cesariae, et Abbatem, et Monachos S. Mariae de Latina intendere possunt.  Et ego Rex per me, et per omnes meos homines quaerelas universis horum omnium, quae mihi, vel hominibus meis ablatae sunt, Pisanis, et omnibus eorum hominibus dimitto, quos usque in hodiernam diem contra eos, eorumque homines aliquo modo intendere poteram.  Pisani insuper, et homines eorum me Rege salvum, et fidum reddent, et omnes meos homines, tam in personis, quam in rebus eorum in mari, et in terra, neque extraneis hominibus studiose me, vel homines  meos offendere permittent.  Et ego Rex et homines mei salvos, et fidos reddemus Pisanos, et homines eorum tam in personis, quam in rebus in mari, et in terra, neque extraneis hominibus studiose eos offendere permittemus.  Excipio tamen eos, quos mei homines invenerint portantes ferrum, aut lignamen, aut picem, seu arma ad vendendum in terra Aegypti.  Quod si tam homines mei  res ipsorum eis abstulerint propterea pax non rumpatur.  Insuper ego Rex dono Pisanis in Tyro Vicecomitatum, qui in eorum propriae curia Pisanos iustificare debeat.  Reservo tamen meae curiae quaerimonia iudicare faciam secundum iustitias, et rationes meas.  Tribuo etiam Pisanis Carrucatas quinque de bona terra iuxta Tyrum, et in Tyro furnum unum.  Quin immo reddo, et confirmo eis quicquid bonae memoriae Dom. Rex Balduinus Avus meus in Tyro, vel in Regno suo olim Pisanis concessit, et Regio privilegio corroboravit, quod est continens.  Ita concedimus Pisanis in Tyro in ruga iuxta porticum quinque domos liberas, et quietas ab omni tributo, vel redditu in perpetuum iure haereditario ad vendendum, vel dandum cuicumque voluerit possidendas.  Naves vero uas, et negotia, quae in Tyro adduxerit vel de Tyro traxerint, exceptis Peregrinis, et aliorum hominum quam Pisanorum Mercatibus, seu negotijs in stando in Tyro similiter ab omni redditu, et datione, libera, et quieta.  Praeterea si aliquis ex Pisanis in toto regno Hierusalem mortuus fuerit, res eiusdem mortui sint liberae, et reddantur familiae, aut genti suae.  Placet etiam mihi, ut Amalricus frater meus Comes Ascalonitanus cum Pisanis pasciscatur.  Hos igitur, quas supra memoravi conventiones pacis inter me, et Pisanos, et homines meos, ac homines eorum reformandae, et in perpetuum, praestante Deo, conservandae laudo, et concedo, et subscriptis testibus sigilli mei sub pressione muniri praecipio.  Factum est autem hac anno ab Incarnat. Dom. MCLVII.  Indict. v.  Huius quidem predictae pacis testes sunt.  Bertrannus de Branca forti Militiae Templi Magister, Gaufridus Fulcherij ex Templi commilionibus unus, Frater Giraldus Hugonis Praeceptor Hospitalis, Frater Guglielmus de Gossedo, Amalricus Comes Ascalonitanus, Robertus de Porta, Rainaldus Falconarius.  Dat.  Accon per manum Rodulphi Bethelemitae Episcopi, Regisque Cancellarij IV non. Novembris.  Ego Albagnanus Iudex, et Notarius Dom. Fiderici Rom. Imperatoris, et Pis. Civitatis Cancellarius, autenticum hujus vidi, legi, et subscripsi.  Ego Albertus Dom. Friderici Rom. Imperatoris Iudex ordinarius, et Notarius authenticum huius vidi, et legi, et hic subscripsi. Ego Ildebrandus Dom. Friderici Romanor. Imperat. Iudex ordinarius, et Notarius authenticum huius vidi, legi, et hic subscripsi.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Mayer (p.174) sees Melisende’s influence in the agreement between Baldwin III and the Pisans which is registered in this document.  He also notes that the materials forbidden in trade with Egypt are mainly for shipbuilding.  They dismiss all outstanding charges between them and pledge mutual protection on land and sea.  Baldwin also grants a court to hear their judicial complaints, but reserves the right to judge anything involving him in his own court. The Pisans were a significant force both military and commercial in the Latin kingdom, contributing with their ships to the original conquest of Jerusalem.  Dagobert/Dalbert of Pisa was Patriarch of Jerusalem at the beginning of the 12th century but was a controversial figure, deposed and reinstated.  By mid century, Pisa was allied with the Ghibellines and the emperor Frederick I, in whose service some of the witnesses are.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Tronci, P. <em>Annali Pisani</em> (Pisa: Vannucchi, 1828-29), 1.137-38, RRH #322.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1156