---
letter_id: "23858"
title: "A letter from Richard I, king of England (1193)"
ititle: "a letter from richard i, king of england (1193)"
ltr_date: "1193"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/148.html"
senders:
  - id: 26184
    name: Richard I, King of England
    iname: richard i, king of england
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 24
    name: Eleanor of Aquitaine
    iname: eleanor of aquitaine
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Richard, by the grace of God king of Angliae, etc. to his revered lady and dearest mother Eleanor, by that same grace queen of England, greeting and all the happiness that a devoted son can desire for his mother.
First to God and then to your serenity, sweetest mother, we give thanks as we can, though we can not suffice to actions so worthy of thanks, for your loyalty to us and the faithful care and diligence you give to our lands for peace and defense so devotedly and effectively.  Indeed we have learned a lot and partly we also know that through the mercy of God and your counsel and help the defense of our lands is and will be in great part provided.  For your prudence and discretion is the greatest cause of our land remaining in a peaceful state until our arrival.  Now, however, dearest mother, we transmit to your benevolence our dearest one, the venerable man Hubert bishop of Salisbury.  He, as the whole world knows, gives such service to us and to all Christianity that it can in no way be recounted.  He has also borne many labors and expenses in the Roman curia for our liberation and taken a very strenuous and dangerous journey to us in Germany.  We had fully recognized his loyalty and the love of a constant spirit with which he embraced us before but now [we recognize it] most fully from the faithful work and fervent diligence which he gave so affectionately and effectively for our liberation with the emperor and princes of the empire.  And since we are certain that his promotion will hasten our liberation and strengthen the defense of our lands, we wish to promote him to the church of Canterbury.  Our will is for him and against any other.  Dearest mother, with all possible entreaty of devotion, we beg you that as you love us you take care to hasten his promotion in the Canterbury church with all speed.  This is the only business, after the business of our liberation, that we commit to you to press for.
With me as witness at Speier, 30 March.  In the words which William of St. Mary [S.Mere l'Eglise] will speak to you on these matters, you may have faith.  Same witness.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ricardus, Dei gratia, rex Angliae, etc.; reverendae dominae suae et matri carissimae Alienorae, eadem gratia reginae Angliae, salutem, et omnem quam devotus filius potest matri desiderare felicitatem. In primis Deo et postmodum vestrae serenitati, mater dulcissima, gratias quascunque possumus exsolvimus, licet ad tam dignas gratiarum actiones sufficere non possumus, pro fidelitate quam nobis servatis, et fideli cura et diligentia quam terrarum nostrarum paci ac defensioni tam devote et efficaciter impenditis. Satis quidem cognovimus et ex parte scimus, quod per Dei miserationem et vestrum consilium et auxilium, terrarum nostrarum defensioni est et erit in maxima parte provisum. Maxima namque causa vestra est prudentia et discretio, quare usque in adventum nostrum terra nostra in statu debeat permanere pacifico. Nunc autem, mater carissima, vestrae transmittimus benignitati carissimum nostrum, virum venerabilem Hubertum Saresberiensem episcopum. Qui, sicut mundus novit universus, in ultramarinis partibus toti Christianitati et nobis tam grata impendit obsequia, quod nullatenus possunt enarrari. Qui etiam in curia Romana pro nostra liberatione tot labores sustinuit et expensas, et tam laboriosum iter et periculosum ad nos usque in Alimanniam arripuit. Fidelitatem tunc ejus et constantis animi dilectionem qua nos amplectitur plenius cognovimus, sed nunc quidem plenissime per fidelem operam et ferventem diligentiam quam liberationi nostrae tam affectuose et efficaciter impendit, penes imperatorem et proceres imperii. Et quoniam certi sumus quod in illius promotione nostra maturior erit liberatio, et fortior terrarum nostrarum defensio, ipsum in ecclesiam Cantuariensem volumus promovere. Voluntas enim nostra est de ipso, et de alio contraire. Mater carissima, cum omni qua possumus devotionis instantia vobis supplicamus, quatenus sicut nos diligitis, ipsius promotionem in Cantuariensem ecclesiam sub omni celeritate festinare curetis. Hoc enim solum est negotium, post negotium liberationis nostrae, quod vobis magis committimus festinandum. Teste me ipso apud Spiram, xxx. die Martii. Verbis autem quae Willelmus de Sanctue Mariae ecclesia vobis super his exponet, fidem habeatis. Teste eodem.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Richard writes from captivity expressing his gratitude to his mother for her loyal and effective regency and requesting her action in the naming of his candidate as archbishop of Canterbury.  He also alerts her to the oral message he is sending by a messenger.  Richard also wrote to his justiciars in England about the same matter, but emphasizing Hubert's activities for God and Christianity in the East (ep.400).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Chronicles and Memorials of the Reign of Richard I</em>, v.2, <em>Epistolae Cantuarienses,</em> ed. William Stubbs in series <em>Regnum Britannicarum Medii Aevi Scriptores, Chronicles and Memorials of Great Britain and Ireland during the Middle Ages</em> (London: Longman, Green, 1865), ep.399.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1193