---
letter_id: "23863"
title: "A letter from Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes ()"
ititle: "a letter from marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/153.html"
senders:
  - id: 25
    name: Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes
    iname: marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21455
    name: Louis VII, King of France
    iname: louis vii, king of france
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To her dearest lord and father, Louis, by grace of God king of the French, M[arie] countess of Troyes, his beloved daughter, greetings and deepest love.
The certain hope of succeeding compels me to address my prayers to you frequently.  That is why I beg your paternity beseechingly most pious father to relinquish for love of God and me, the anger and ill will you have had up to now against Pagan of Meleun, once your ostiary, from I know not what suggestions of false-speakers and by your grace restore him to his former office in your house.  The term has passed which you imposed on me.  I would not have dared to ask you about this within the term you set.  May your highness be well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Domino ac patri suo carissimo Ludovico, Dei gratia Francorum Regi, M. Trecensis Comitissa, ejus dilectissima filia, salutem et intimum amorem. Certa spes obtinendi preces meas ad vos dirigere multoties compellit. Inde est quod paternitatem vestram, piissime pater, suppliciter exoro, quatinus Dei et mei amore iram et malam voluntatem quam hactenus, nescio quo falsidicorum admonitu, adversus Paganum de Meleun, quondam ostiarium vestrum, habuistis, hoc modo vestri gratia condonetis, ut in pristinum domus vestrae restituatur officium. Jam enim terminus transiit, quem mihi imposuistis. Vos equidem super hoc me rogare infra terminum a vobis ei constitutum nullatenus auderem.  Valeat sublimitas vestra.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Marie intercedes with her father for a member of his staff who has been defamed.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF16 ep.354, p.115
