---
letter_id: "23864"
title: "A letter from Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes ()"
ititle: "a letter from marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-10"
url: "/letter/154.html"
senders:
  - id: 25
    name: Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes
    iname: marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21455
    name: Louis VII, King of France
    iname: louis vii, king of france
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To her dearest lord and father, Louis, by grace of God king of the French, M[arie] countess of Troyes, greetings with fitting service.
I have heard, most beloved father, that certain men of St. Denis have complained to you a good deal about some of my men at Coulumière and told you that my men seized them unjustly.  But your discretion will know without doubt that my men seized them justly.  For they were fleeing from the toll of Coulumière, which is mine.  They have done this many times, so the said toll has been reduced to almost nothing.  There is a further wrong, in that I now get 40 to 60 shillings while my lord Count used to take 7 to 10 pounds and they never complained to you.  Now indeed that they know I get the said toll, if anything untoward happens to them they run to you and complain for the least thing.
So I implore your love as strongly as I can that you not let anything you hear from them disturb your spirit towards me.  [God] forbid that I should do anything against you!  I am always fully prepared to do your will.  For the rest, I ask that you make no further complaint about me to my lord.(1)  But whatever would please you, order me and I shall do it.  May your highness be well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Domino et patri suo carissimo Ludovico, Dei gratia Francorum Regi, M. Trecensis Comitissa, salutem cum debito obsequio. Audivi, dilectissime pater, quod quidam homines de Sancto-Dionysio de quibusdam hominibus meis apud Columbarium manentibus plurimum conquesti sunt vobis, et dixerunt vobis quod homines mei eos injuste ceperunt. Vestra tamen procul dubio noscat discretio, quod homines mei eos juste ceperunt. Pedagium enim de Columbariis, quod meum est, effugiebant. Hoc etiam facere multoties consueverunt, et sic fere ad nihilum praefatum pedagium redactum est. De hujusmodi etiam forefacto, unde nunc XL aut LX capio solidos, Comes dominus meus VII aut X capiebat libras, et tunc nullam vobis faciebant querelam. Nunc vero, quia jam dictum pedagium me sciunt habere, ex quo iis aliquod accedit infortunium ad vos concurrunt, et vobis pro minimo conqueruntur. Unde vestram quamplurimum imploro dilectionem, ne quid ab eis auditum vestrum erga me conturbet animum. Absit enim ut aliquid contra vos faciam! Vestrae equidem voluntati sum penitus parata. De caetero, vos rogo ut nullam ulterius de me domino meo faciatis querelam ; sed quicquid vobis placuerit mihi praecipite, et ego faciam. Valeat sublimitas vestra.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Marie defends the actions of her men against her father’s men who avoid a toll which her husband had been able to collect without complaint.  The date suggested by the editor (1164) seems too early, since Marie seems to be in charge and refers to her husband’s practice in the past.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)It is not clear to whom she is referring here, whether to her husband, who is presumably in the East, or to a local bishop or abbot.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF16 ep.355, p.115-16
