---
letter_id: "23865"
title: "A letter from Alexander III (1179)"
ititle: "a letter from alexander iii (1179)"
ltr_date: "1179"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2015-03-25"
url: "/letter/155.html"
senders:
  - id: 21214
    name: Alexander III
    iname: alexander iii
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25
    name: Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes
    iname: marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his beloved daughter in Christ, noble woman countess of Troyes.  Though we are debtors to all by the ministry of the office we have accepted, we are more inclined to protect the rights of those who show purer devotion to us and the church and do not refuse to travel to lands across the sea to defend the Christian name.  Induced by that reason and inclined by your requests, we take the land of our beloved son, the noble man H[enry] count of Troyes, your husband, and you with everything pertaining to you under the protection of St. Peter and us until his return and we affirm under the patronage of this document that no man is permitted to weaken the letter of our protection or to oppose it by reckless boldness.  If anyone should presume to attempt this, he should know that he will incur the anger of almighty God and of the saints Peter and Paul the apostles.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilecte in Christo filie, nobili mulieri comitisse Trecensi.
Licet omnibus simus ex suscepti officii ministerio debitores, propensius tamen eorum debemus iura tueri, qui nobis et ecclesie devotionem exhibent puriorem et pro defensione Christiani nominis peregrinari in transmarinis partibus non recusant.  Hac itaque ratione inducti et tuis postulationibus inclinati terram dilecti filii nostri, nobilis viri H[enrici] comitis Trecensis, viri tui, et tuam cum omnibus ad vos pertinentibus usque ad ipsius reditum sub beati Petri et nostra protectione suscipimus et presentis scripti patrocinio communimus statuentes, ut nulli omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostre protectionis infringere vel ei ausu temerario contraire.  Si quis autem hoc attemptare presumpserit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei et beatorum Petri et Pauli apostolorum eius se noverit incursurum.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>In response to her request, the pope takes the countess and her possessions as well as her husband’s lands under his protection, while her husband is on crusade.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Epistolae Pontificum Romanorum ineditae</em>, ed. S. Loewenfeld, ep.308, p.179-80.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1179