---
letter_id: "23868"
title: "A letter from Chrétien de Troyes ()"
ititle: "a letter from chrétien de troyes ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2015-03-19"
url: "/letter/158.html"
senders:
  - id: 21297
    name: Chrétien de Troyes
    iname: chrétien de troyes
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25
    name: Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes
    iname: marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Since my lady of Champagne
Wishes me to begin a romance,
I shall do so most willingly,
As one who is entirely at her service
In anything he can undertake in this world.
I say this without any flattery,
Though another might begin his story
With the desire to flatter her.
He might say (and I would agree)
That she is the lady who surpasses
All women who are alive,
Just as the foehn [wind] surpasses the other winds
Which blow in May or April.
Certainly I am not the one
Intent upon flattering his lady;
Will I say:  "As the polished diamond
Eclipses the pearl and the sard,
The countess eclipses queens"?
Indeed not;  I'll say nothing of the sort
Though it be true in spite of me.
I will say, however, that her command
Has more importance in this work
Than any thought or effort I might put into it.
Chretien begins his book
About the Knight of the Cart;
The source and the meaning are furnished and given him
By the countess, and he strives
Carefully to add nothing
But his effort and diligence;
Now he begins his story.
I will say, however, that her command
Has more importance in this work
Than any thought or effort I might put into it.
Chrétien begins his book
About the Knight of the Cart;
The source and the meaning are furnished and given him
By the countess, and he strives
Carefully to add nothing
But his effort and diligence;
Now he begins his story.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Puis que ma dame de Chanpaigne
vialt que romans a feire anpraigne,
je l'anprendrai molt volentiers,
come cil qui est suens antiers
de quanqu'il puet el monde feire,
sans rien de losange avant treire.
Mes tex s'an poist antremetre
qui li volsist losenge metre
si deist (et jel tesmoignasse)
que ce est la dame qui passe
totes celes qui sont vivanz,
si con li funs passe les vanz
qui vante en mai ou en avril.
Par foi, je ne sui mie cil
qui vuelle losangier sa dame;
dirai je:  "Tant com une jame
vaut de pelles et de sardines,
vaut la contesse de reines?"
Naie voir; je n'en dirai rien,
s'est il voirs maleoit gre mien;
mes tant dirai ge que mialz oevre
ses comandemanz an ceste oevre
que sans ne painne que g'i mete.
Del Chevalier de la Charrete
comance Crestiens son livre;
matiere et san li done et livre
la contesse, et il s'antremet
de panser si que rien n'i met
fors sa painne et s'antancion;
des or comance sa raison.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>In his prologue to the <em>Chevalier de la charrette</em>, ll.1-29, Chrétien makes it clear that Marie commissioned the romance from him and he speaks of her role in its composition, though he seems to be addressing her only indirectly. There may be an echo in these lines of a poem sent by Baudri of Bourgeuil to Adela of Blois.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lancelot, or the Knight of the Cart</em>, by Chrétien de Troyes, ed. and trans. by William W. Kibler (New York: Garland, 1984). Published here by permission of the author.</p>