---
letter_id: "23869"
title: "A letter from Noblewoman A and Count G (1174?)"
ititle: "a letter from noblewoman a and count g (1174?)"
ltr_date: "1174?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-14"
url: "/letter/159.html"
senders:
  - id: 21487
    name: Noblewoman A and Count G
    iname: noblewoman a and count g
    type: people
    url: /people/21487.html
receivers:
  - id: 25
    name: Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes
    iname: marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the illustrious and wise woman M., Countess of Champagne, the noble woman A. and Count G. send greeting and whatever in the world is more pleasing.
Ancient custom shows us plainly, and the way of life of the ancients demands, that if we are to have justice done we should seek first of all in the place where Wisdom is clearly known to have found a home for herself and that we should seek for the truth of reason at its source, where it is abundant, rather than beg for its decisions where it flowers scantily in small streams.  For a great poverty of possessions can scarcely offer to anyone a wealth of good things or distribute an abundance of fertillity.  Where the master is oppressed by great want it is wholly impossible for the vassal to abound in wealth.
Now on a certain day, as we sat under the shade of a pine tree of marvellous height and great breadth of spread, devoted wholly to love's idleness and striving to investigate Love's mandates in a good-tempered and spirited debate, we began to discern a twofold doubt, and we wearied ourselves with laborious arguments as to whether true love can find any place between husband and wife and whether jealousy flourishing between two lovers ought to be approved of.  After we had argued the matter back and forth and each of us seemed to bolster up his position with reasonable arguments, neither one would give in to the other or agree with the arguments he brought forward.  We ask you to settle this dispute, and we have sent you both sides of the question in detail, so that after you have carefully examined the truth of it our disagreement may be brought to a satisfactory end and settled by a fair decision.  For knowing clearly and in manifest truth that you have a great abundance of wisdom and that you would not want to deprive anyone of justice, we believe that we will in no wise be deprived of it;  we most urgently implore Your Excellency's decision, and we desire with all our hearts, begging you most humbly by our present address, that you will give continued attention to our case and that Your Prudence will render a fair decision in the matter without making any delay in giving the verdict.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Illustri feminae ac sapienti M. Campaniae comitissae mulier nobilis A. et comes G. salutem et quidquid in orbe iucundius.
Antiqua nobis consuetudo aperte demonstrat, et veterum illud ordo deposcit, ut inde iustitiae praecipue inquiratur effectus, ubi sapientia ipsa manifeste cognoscitur sibi domicilium invenisse, et rationis veritatem potius ex fontis quaerere plenitudine qua ex parvorum tenuitate rivorum emendicata postulare suffragia.  Summa namque rerum egestas vix poterit alicui copiam propinare bonorum vel fertilitatis abundantiam derivare.  Magna namque domino inopia fatigato erit impossibile prorsus, divitiis abundare vasallum.
Quadam ergo die, dum sub mirae altitudinis et extensae nimis latitudinis umbra pini sederemus et amoris essemus penitus otio mancipati eiusque suavi et acerrimo disputationis conflictu studeremus investigare mandata, duplicis dubitationis nos coepit instigare discretio et laboriosi fatigare sermones, an scilicet inter coniugatos verus amor locum sibi valeat invenire, et an inter amantes vigens sit zelotypia comprobanda.  Quarum quidem dubitationum quum frequens inter nos valde disputatio verteretur, et uterque nostrum suam partem videretur rationabili sententia roborare, neuter alterius voluit acquiescere voluntati vel productis rationibus consentire.  Super quo vestrum postulamus arbitrium utriusque vobis partis plenarie disputatione transmissa, ut sic a vobis subtiliter veritate discussa nostrum valeat iurgium competenti fine sopiri et iusta definitione sedari.  Nam liquide et manifesta veritate scientes, sapientiae vos omnimodam plenitudinem possidere ac neminem iustitia velle decipere, decipi nullatenus credentes, Excellentiae vestrae instantissime iudicium imploramus et animi pleno desideramus affectu, praesenti vobis devotissime supplicantes affatu, ut huius negotii pro nobis frequens vos sollicitudo detentet, vestraeque prudentiae iustum super hoc procedat arbitrium, nulla temporis dilatione prorogante iudicium.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Andreas Capellanus cites this and the answering letter (see other letter sent by noblewoman A and count G. 160.html) in his book on love (book 1, dialogue 7).  There is no way of knowing if the letters about love and jealousy and marriage are authentic, were made up by Andreas, or were reconstructed by him from letters or discussions he had witnessed.  In any case, since Marie is clearly identified as the receiver and sender, they say something about the way she and perhaps her ideas could be portrayed by a contemporary.  That Marie heard love debates while/if she was in Poitiers is highly likely, but whether she took part or judged them is unknown.  Andreas dates the letters 1174, though his own text may be 1184-86.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Andreae Capellani Regii Francorum, De amore libri tres</em>, ed. E.Trojel (Munich: Eidos, 1964 repr., pub.1892), p.150-52; translation from J.J. Parry, <em>The Art of Courtly Love by Andreas Capellanus</em>, (New York: Ungar, 1964 repr., originally publ by Columbia University).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1174?