---
letter_id: "23726"
title: "A letter from Ermengard of Narbonne, viscountess of Narbonne (1164)"
ititle: "a letter from ermengard of narbonne, viscountess of narbonne (1164)"
ltr_date: "1164"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-28"
url: "/letter/16.html"
senders:
  - id: 5
    name: Ermengard of Narbonne, viscountess of Narbonne
    iname: ermengard of narbonne, viscountess of narbonne
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21455
    name: Louis VII, King of France
    iname: louis vii, king of france
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To most honorable Louis, by grace of God most happy king of the French, her only lord, E[rmengard] viscountess of Narbonne, his special/devoted woman, service of owed reverence.  Your veneration, lord, will not doubt that I and mine always obey your charges; and whatever I possess in the world is subject to your authority.  I pray only one thing, that your generosity keep me frequently in your memory since after God all my hope hangs on you, my dearest lord.  I would send each day, if I had swift messengers, to remind you of me.
The reason I have not yet fulfilled your charge about the horse is that I have not yet found a good horse.  So let your majesty not be moved against me over the delay, since as soon as I can I shall send the best I can find in our land to suit such a lord.  May my lord fare well, always remembering me.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Honorabilissimo Ludovico, Dei gratia Francorum Regi felicissimo, domino unico suo, E. Narbonensis vicecomitissa, ejusdem specialis femina, debitae reverentiae obsequium.
Vestra enim, domine, non dubitet veneratio, me et mea vestris semper obedire mandatis; et quicquid in mundo possideo vestro subjacet imperio. Verumtamen hoc unum precor, quod mei memoriam vestra frequentet liberalitas, quoniam post Deum tota spes mea in vobis carissimo domino meo pendet. Et deo singulis diebus, si promptos haberem nuncios, vobis in mei memoriam dirigerem. Quod de equo mandatum vestrum nondum implevi, causa est utilis inquisto, quod nondum bonum invenirem equum. Eapropter de mora nostra adversus me non moveatur majestas, quoniam in brevi quanto meliorem, qui tantum deceat dominum, invenire in tota terra nostra potero, mittam. Valeat dominus meus mei semper memor.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Ermengard excuses her failure to find the king a horse. Cheyette suggests that the expensive gift of a horse was a price Louis exacted for having recognized her right to rule and judge (<em>Ermengard of Narbonne,</em> 218-19).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF16 ep.281, p. 91-92, which dates it 1164
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1164