---
letter_id: "23876"
title: "A letter from Adalbero, archbishop of Reims ()"
ititle: "a letter from adalbero, archbishop of reims ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-10"
url: "/letter/166.html"
senders:
  - id: 21197
    name: Adalbero, archbishop of Reims
    iname: adalbero, archbishop of reims
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 26
    name: Theophanu, empress
    iname: theophanu, empress
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Although up to now I have revered you as my lady for the merits of your most excellent husband the emperor, always to be remembered, your special kindnesses and your son’s continue my/our former love and greatly increase our loyalty to you and yours.  Our church cherishes among its special treasures the pledge of your friendship to us.  May St. Remy feel the favor of such a ruler/lady, if it can be, in the return of what has been lost, as much for his merits as for ours, if the future services should please.  We will feel that our gratitude is well founded if by legate or better in writing you deign to report about the peace or the condition of peace to be made with our king [Louis V], to us who are ready in all things, insofar as it is proper, to show the most sincere loyalty.  So we shall be able to consult better together for your safety and ours.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Et si hactenus vos ob merita vestri viri excellentissimi Augusti semperque memorandi, ut dominam colui, specialia tamen nunc beneficia vestra vestrique filii, et praeteritam continent dilectionem, et fidem nostram ad vos ac vestros plurimam augent. Fovet nostra Ecclesia inter praecipuos thesauros pignus vestrae amicitiae circa nos. Sentiat ergo beatus Remigius tantae dominae favorem, si fieri potest, in recipiendis rebus amissis, cum propter sui merita, tum propter nostra si qua placebunt exhibenda servitia. Sentiamus et nos gratiam jam bene fundatam, scilicet ut legato, et melius scriptis, de pace et pacis conditione cum nostro rege habenda dignemini significare nobis, per omnia paratis, quantum fas est fidem sincerissimam exhibere. Sicque saluti vestrae ac nostrae in commune melius poterimus consulere.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Adalbero makes two requests of the empress, help for his church and information about her relations with the king of France, Louis V, his other lord.  Louis is the son of her half-sister-in-law, Emma.  Adalbero favored Hugh Capet in the struggle for power among the Franks.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH BDKz 2 ep.85 p.113; also in HGF10 ep.6 p388 and PL137 ep.21 c511-12, only differences, <em>continent</em> for<em> continuant,</em> <em>et</em> for<em> vel</em>,<em> que</em> for <em>quippe</em>.</p>