---
letter_id: "23880"
title: "A letter from Emma, queen ()"
ititle: "a letter from emma, queen ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-10"
url: "/letter/170.html"
senders:
  - id: 21321
    name: Emma, queen
    iname: emma, queen
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 26
    name: Theophanu, empress
    iname: theophanu, empress
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Emma, formerly Queen to Lady Empress Theophania.
May the piety of your name assist the afflicted captive from her predators.  I once had family and rank and the name of kings.  Now, as if without family or rank, I am afflicted with all kinds of abuses, made the captive handmaid of most cruel enemies.  And how will that impious K[arl, Charles of Lorraine] hear my voice who scorned to hear yours?  You indeed held me worthy in your memory, who ordered what you wanted to be done for me.  But since he occupied the royal city [Laon], he does not think it fitting to his name to submit to anyone.  I do not wish to unfold his spirit, by which he vainly promises himself kingdoms.  This only I pray, that he not be dashed against me, a woman, when he is pounded back into the seas.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Hemma quondam Regina Dominae Augustae Theophaniae.
Pietas vestri nominis subveniat afflictae, et a praedonibus captivatae.  Et mihi quondam fuit et genus, et dignitas, ac regium nomen.  Nunc quasi sine genere, sine dignitate, omnibus afficior contumeliis, ancilla captiva crudelissimorum hostium facta.  Et quomodo ille impius Carolus vocem meam audiret, qui vestram audire contempsit?  Et vos quidem me vestra memoria dignam habuistis, quae fieri circa me velletis, imperastis; hicque regiam urbem occupavit.  Parere alicui non putat suo nomini convenire.  Nolo ei spiritum explicare, quo sibi regna inaniter promittit.  Hoc tantum oro, ne in me feminam illidatur, dum in mares retunditur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Emma writes from captivity in Laon, held by her brother-in-law Charles of Lorraine, to ask help from her sister-in-law, empress Theophanu, although the empress’s attempts to win Emma’s freedom by diplomatic means have not so far succeeded.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH BDKz 2 ep.119 p.146-47; also in HGF 10, ep.28 p.395. Texts differ only in an "et" not in first sentence of MGH, <em>quia</em> for<em> que</em>, and <em>ei</em> for <em>eius</em> below.</p>