---
letter_id: "23881"
title: "A letter from Hugh Capet, King of France ()"
ititle: "a letter from hugh capet, king of france ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/171.html"
senders:
  - id: 26181
    name: Hugh Capet, King of France
    iname: hugh capet, king of france
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 26
    name: Theophanu, empress
    iname: theophanu, empress
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Perceiving your benevolence and good will towards us, we wished to receive the hostages from K[arl, Charles of Lorraine] and lift the siege according to your will, desiring to preserve that most trusted association and holy friendship.  But K[arl], scorning the legates and your jurisdiction, does not agree to this, does not let the queen go, does not accept any hostages from the bishop.  But he will see what good his stubbornness does him.  Desiring to confirm your friendship to us in perpetuity, we have determined that our companion and participant in the kingdom, A[delaide] will meet you at Stenay the 11th kalends of September and those things which you establish between you as good and equitable, we will preserve in perpetuity between us and your son without deception or fraud.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Benevolentiam ac affabilitatem vestram circa nos sentientes, obsides a Carolo accipere, et obsidionem solvere secundum voluntatem vestram voluimus fidissimam societatem ac sanctam amicitiam conservare cupientes. Porro hic Carolus legatos et imperium vestrum contemnens, nec super his acquiescit, nec reginam relinquit, nec ab episcopo ullos obsides accipit. Et hic quidem viderit quid sua sibi prosit pertinacia. Vestram autem amicitiam ad nos in perpetuum confirmare cupientes, sociam ac participem nostri regni A. decrevimus vobis occurrere ad villam Satanicum XI Kal. Sep. Ea quae inter vos de bono et aequo sanxeritis, inter nos ac filium vestrum sine dolo et fraude in perpetuum conservaturi.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Hugh, at Theophanu’s request, had attempted to negotiate the release of queen Emma and bishop Adalbero of Laon, but failed.  He wants to arrange a meeting between the empress and his wife, queen Adelaide.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH BDKz 2 ep.120 p.147-48; also in HGF10 ep.31 p.396, and in PL139 ep.120 c231, same text.
