---
letter_id: "23882"
title: "A letter from Hugh Capet, King of France ()"
ititle: "a letter from hugh capet, king of france ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-21"
url: "/letter/172.html"
senders:
  - id: 26181
    name: Hugh Capet, King of France
    iname: hugh capet, king of france
    type: people
    url: /people/26181.html
receivers:
  - id: 26
    name: Theophanu, empress
    iname: theophanu, empress
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We rejoice in your recovery and thank you for asking about us.  We indeed, with God’s help, are well and desire the best things for you.  We do not attempt to violate the friendship we have, knowingly, nor to respond to any injury received from your people with injury.  But from the kalends of January to the beginning of Lent we are prepared to meet you within the borders of our kingdom of France, Burgundy, and Lorraine, as you will designate the day and name the place, so the peace and concord of the kingdoms and churches of God will not be deprived through any fault of ours.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Gratulamur meliori habitudine corporis instaurata in vobis simulque, quod nostram scire voluistis. Nos quidem Deo propitio et bene valemus et optima queque vobis optamus. Nec ceptam amicitiam scienter violare molimur nec acceptam a vestris iniuriam iniuria propulsare. Sed a kl. ian. usque ad inicium quadragesime in confinio nostra Francie, Burgundie ac Lothariensis regni occurrere vobis parati sumus, sicut designabitis diem certum et locum suo nomine descriptum, ut pax et concordia regnorum et ecclesiarum Dei nostro vitio non destituatur.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Neither the sender nor the recipient is identified and others have been suggested, Adalbero of Reims as sender, king Conrad of Burgundy as recipient, but Fritz Weigle, the editor, thinks Hugo and Theophanu are the most likely.  After an exchange about their health, the writer asks for a meeting.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH, BDKz 2 ep.138 p.165
