---
letter_id: "23890"
title: "A letter from Peter Abelard ()"
ititle: "a letter from peter abelard ()"
ltr_date: "1130-34"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-05-11"
url: "/letter/180.html"
senders:
  - id: 21503
    name: Peter Abelard
    iname: peter abelard
    type: people
    url: /people/21503.html
receivers:
  - id: 28
    name: Heloise, abbess of the Paraclete
    iname: heloise, abbess of the paraclete
    type: woman
    url: /woman/28.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><div class="WordSection1"><p class="Bodytext31">&nbsp; &nbsp;If, since our conversion from the world to God, I have never written you a letter to comfort or encourage you, this should not be attributed to my negligence but to your prudence. I did not consider my help necessary for one upon whom the divine grace has so lavishly bestowed all that she needs. By your words and your example you are able to teach those who are in error, to strengthen the fainthearted, to exhort the lukewarm, as you have long been accustomed to do since you became prioress under the abbess. If you watch over your daughters as carefully now as you watched over your sisters then, I consider it sufficient and I regard any teaching or encouragement on my part as superfluous. But if to you in your humility it seems otherwise, and you need me to instruct you and write to you concerning matters that pertain to God, tell me what you want, so that I may write to you again, according as the Lord may grant me.&nbsp;<br>&nbsp; &nbsp;I give thanks to God, who has inspired your hearts with anxiety for me in my most grave and constant dangers and thus made you partners in my afflictions, so that with the help of your prayers the divine mercy may protect me and swiftly crush Satan under my feet. For this reason, above all, I have hastened to send you the Psalter that you have earnestly requested, my sister once dear in the world, now most dear in Christ. With it, I hope that you may offer a perpetual sacrifice of prayers to the Lord for our many and great transgressions and for the perils that daily threaten me.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; There are many proofs and examples showing the great influence the prayers of the faithful may have with God and his saints, especially the prayers of women for their dear ones and of wives for their husbands. With this particularly in mind, the Apostle admonishes us to pray without ceasing.&nbsp; We read that the Lord said to Moses (Exod.32:10):&nbsp; “Spare me your importunacy, let me vent my anger and destroy them.”&nbsp; And he said to Jeremiah (7:26):&nbsp; “Nor do you ... think to plead for this people of mine, or ... thwart my will.”&nbsp; By these words the Lord makes it clear that the prayers of the faithful place a bridle, so to speak, on his wrath and curb it. Thus his anger may not exact from sinners the penalties they deserve, and the supplication of his friends may turn aside one whom justice moves almost spontaneously to vengeance, and as if by force restrain him against his will. So he says to one who is praying or about to pray (Jer. 7:16): "Thwart my will, you shall have no hearing." The Lord commands that prayers shall not be offered for the wicked. But the just man prays, notwithstanding the Lord's injunction, and obtains from him what he asks, altering the judgment of the angry Judge. It is said of Moses (Exod. 32:14): "The Lord relented, and spared his people the punishment he had threatened." Elsewhere it is written of all the works of God (Ps. 32:9): "He spoke and they were made." But in this passage it is recorded also that he said the people deserved punishment but, restrained by the virtue of prayer, he did not do what he had promised.&nbsp;<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;Consider, then, how great is the virtue of prayer, if we pray as we are commanded, since by praying the prophet obtained that for which God had forbidden him to pray and turned him away from what he had ordained. Another prophet says to him (Hab. 3:2): "Though we have earned your anger, bethink you of mercy still." Let earthly princes hear this and take heed, those who in carrying out the justice they have ordained and decreed are found to be obstinate rather than just. They are afraid of appearing remiss if they should be merciful and false if they should change their decree, or should not carry out what they have decreed with little forethought, even if they rectify their words by their deeds. These, I may say, should be compared to Jephthah who, more foolishly performing what he had foolishly vowed, killed his only daughter. But the man who desires to be a member of God says with the Psalmist (Ps. 100:1): "Of mercy and of justice my song shall be; a psalm in your honor, Lord." Mercy, it is written, exalts justice; referring to this the Scripture elsewhere warns us (James 2:13): "The merciless will be judged mercilessly."&nbsp;<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; The Psalmist himself had this well in mind, when at the prayer of the wife of Nabal the Carmelite, he mercifully broke the oath he had justly sworn concerning her husband and the destruction of his house. So he put prayer before justice and the supplication of the wife wiped out the offense of her husband. In this instance, my sister, an example is set for you and a pledge is given, to teach you how much your prayer may win for me from God if this woman's prayer obtained so much from a man. For God who is our Father loves his children more than David loved the woman who begged a favor of him. He was rightly considered good and merciful, but God is kindness and mercy itself. And the woman who was a supplicant was a lay woman, who belonged to the world; she was not united to God by the vows of &nbsp;holiness.&nbsp;<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; But if you alone should prove unable to obtain what you desire, that holy community of virgins and widows who are with you will obtain what you cannot achieve by yourself. For when Truth says to his disciples (Matt. 18:20): "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, I am there in the midst of them," and again, "If two of you agree over any request that you make on earth, it will be granted them by my Father who is in heaven," who can fail to see how influential with God is the frequent prayer of a holy congregation? If, as the Apostle asserts (James 5:16): "When a just man prays fervently, there is great virtue in his prayer," what can one hope for from the multitude of a holy community?&nbsp;You know, dearest sister, from the thirty-eighth homily of St. Gregory, how much help the prayer of his brothers quickly brought to the unwilling or resistant monk.* The story of how he was led to an extremity, of the grave anxiety and danger in which his wretched spirit labored, and the great despair and weariness of life in which he called his brothers from their prayers, is carefully set down there and cannot have escaped your prudent reading. May this example summon you and your community of holy nuns more confidently to prayer, so that he from whom, as St. Paul says, women have received their dead restored to life again, may keep me alive for you (Heb. 11:35).<br>&nbsp; &nbsp;If you consult the pages of the Old and New Testaments, you will find that the greatest miracles of resurrection have been displayed only, or chiefly, to women and were performed for them or with respect to them. The Old Testament tells of two dead men who were restored to life in answer to the prayer of their mothers, that is, by Elias and his disciple Elisha (3 Kings 17:17-24; 4 Kings 4:20-37). The Gospel contains the accounts of only three men being restored to life by the Lord and these miracles, which were performed especially for women, confirmed by deeds the apostolic saying quoted above (Heb. 11:35): "There were women, too, who recovered their dead... brought back to life." Moved by compassion, he restored her son whom he had raised to life to his mother, a widow, at the gate of the city of Nairn (Luke 7:12-16). The Lord also raised his own friend, Lazarus, from the dead, at the prayer of his sisters, Mary and Martha (John 11:1-44). And when he granted this same favor to the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue at the petition of her father, "women obtained the resurrection of their dead," for when she was restored to life, she received her own body again from the dead, as the others had obtained the bodies of their dead (Luke 8:40-56; Mark 5:21-43; Matt. 9:18-26).<br>&nbsp; &nbsp;These resurrections were performed at the intercession of only a few; the many prayers of your devoted community, then, will easily obtain the preservation of my life. The self-denial and chastity these women have consecrated to God are so pleasing to him that they will find him the more merciful. Most of those who were raised from the dead were probably not numbered among the faithful; for example, it is not said that the widow to whom the Lord restored her son, though she had not asked it, was a believer. In our case, however, we are united not only by the integrity of our faith, but also by our profession of the same monastic vows.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp;I shall say no more now about your holy community of nuns, in which the devotion of so many virgins and widows serves the Lord perpetually, and I shall address you alone, whose holiness I am sure has such power with God. I have no doubt that you should do all you can for me, especially and above all when I am struggling in such great adversity. Remember always in your prayers, then, him who is especially yours and watch in prayer with more confidence, as you recognize that it is right for you to do so and for this reason more acceptable to him to whom you pray. Listen, 1 beg you, with the heart's ear to what you have heard so often with your bodily ears. It is written in Proverbs (12:4): "Crowned is his brow who wins a vigorous wife," and again (18:22): "A good wife found is a treasure found; the Lord is filling thy cup with happiness." And further on (19:14): "House and hoard a man may inherit; it is the Lord's gift only, if he have a wife that minds her ways." In Ecclesiasticus it is said (26:1): "Happy is the man that has a faithful wife," and a little further on (26:3): "He best thrives that best wives." According to the teaching of the Apostle (1 Cor. 7:14): "The unbelieving husband has shared in his wife's consecration."&nbsp;<br>&nbsp; &nbsp;The divine grace gave a special proof of all this in our own kingdom of France, when King Clovis was converted to the faith of Christ by the prayers of his wife rather than by the preaching of the saints, and submitted his entire kingdom to the divine laws, so that by the example of the great, the lesser people might be aroused to constancy in prayer. The parable of the Lord strongly urges us to this constancy, where it said (Luke 11:8): "I tell you, even if he will not bestir himself to grant it out of friendship, shameless asking will make him rise and give his friend all he needs." If I may say so, it was by this kind of importunity, as I remarked before, that Moses softened the severity of divine justice and changed its judgment.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp;You know, my beloved, how much loving charity your community used to show in prayer when I was with you there. Every day at the conclusion of each of the Hours, the sisters used to offer this special prayer to the Lord for me and, after a suitable response with its versicle had been said and chanted, they added to them prayers and a collect as follows:</p><p class="Bodytext51"><em>Response</em>: Forsake me not, O Lord, do not depart from me.<br><em>Versicle</em>: O Lord, be always at hand to help me (Ps. 69:2).<br><em>Prayer:</em> Save your servant, O my God, whose help is in you. O Lord, hear my prayer and let my cry come unto you (Ps. 101:2).<br><em>Let us Pray</em>: God, who through your poor servant has deigned to gather your handmaids together in your name, we beseech you to grant that both he and we ourselves may persevere in your will. Through our Lord, etc.&nbsp;<br>But now that I am away from you, I need the help of your prayers even more, since I am fettered by the fear of a greater danger. So I beg and beseech you to let me find that, especially in my absence, you will be so generous and so truly charitable as to add this suitable form of prayer at the end of each of the Hours.&nbsp;<br><em>Response</em>: O Lord, Father and Ruler of my life, do not forsake me, that I may not fall down in the sight of my adversaries; let not my enemy rejoice over me. (Ecclus. 23:3)<br><em>Versicle</em>: Take up arms and shield and rise up to help me, lest my enemy rejoice over me. (Ps. 34:2)<br><em>Invocation:</em> Save your servant, O my God, who hopes in you. Send him aid, O Lord, from your holy place, and watch over him from Sion. Be unto him, 0 Lord, a tower of strength in the face of his enemy. Lord, hear my prayer and let my cry come unto you.<br><em>Prayer</em>: God, who through your servant was pleased to gather together your handmaids in your name, we implore you to protect him from all adversity, and restore him unharmed to your handmaids. Through our Lord, etc.</p><p>&nbsp; &nbsp;But if the Lord should deliver me into the hands of my enemies, so that they prevail over me and kill me, or if by any chance I go the way of all flesh while I am away from you, wherever my body may lie, whether exposed or buried, I beseech you to have it brought to your cemetery. There your daughters, or, rather, your sisters will often see my tomb and may be the more moved to send up prayers to God for me. I consider no place safer and more salutary for a soul grieving over its sins and desolate in its wandering than that place which is rightly consecrated to the Paraclete, the Comforter, and is distinguished by his name. I do not think there is a more fitting place for Christian burial among any of the faithful than among women devoted to Christ. It was women who were solicitous about the tomb of the Lord Jesus Christ and came to it both before and afterward with precious ointments, who preceded him and followed him, watching anxiously over his tomb and weeping over the death of the Bridegroom, as it is written: "The women sitting over against the tomb, and weeping, lamented the Lord." There, just before his Resurrection, they were comforted by the apparition and the words of an angel and at once they were found worthy to taste the joy of his Resurrection, when he appeared to them twice, and to touch him with their hands.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp;But, finally and above all, I ask this of you, that you, who are now troubled with too much anxiety about the dangers to my body, will then be especially anxious for the welfare of my soul and will show the dead man how you loved the living by giving me the special and proper help of your prayers.<br>Live, prosper, and your sisters with you,<br>Live, but in Christ, and I pray you, remember me.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><p></p></div><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p><span>Heloisae, dilectissimae sorori suae in Christo, Abaelardus, frater eius in ipso.</span></p><p><span>&nbsp; &nbsp; Quod post nostram a saeculo ad Deum conversionem nondum tibi aliquid consolationis vel exhortationis scripserim, non negligentiae meae, sed tuae, de qua semper plurimum confido, prudentiae imputandum est. Non enim eam his indigere credidi, cui abundanter quaecumque necessaria sunt divina gratia impertivit, ut tam verbis scilicet quam exemplis errantes valeas docere, pusillanimes consolari, tepidos exhortari, sicut et facere iam dudum consuevisti cum sub abbatissa prioratum obtineres. Quod si nunc tanta diligentia tuis provideas filiabus, quanta tunc sororibus, satis esse credimus ut iam omnino superfluam doctrinam vel exhortationem nostram arbitremur. Sin autem humilitati tuae aliter videtur, et in iis etiam quae ad Deum pertinent magisterio nostro atque scriptis indiges, super his quae velis scribe mihi ut ad ipsam rescribam prout mihi Dominus annuerit.<br></span>&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;Deo autem gratias, qui gravissimorum et assiduorum periculorum meorum sollicitudinem vestris cordibus inspirans, afflictionis meae participes vos fecit ut orationum suffragio vestrarum divina miseratio me protegat et velociter Satanam sub pedibus nostris conterat.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Ad hoc autem praecipue psalterium quod a me sollicite requisisti, soror in saeculo quondam cara, nunc in Christo carissima, mittere maturavi. In quo videlicet pro nostris magnis et multis excessibus et quotidiana periculorum meorum instantia iuge Domino sacrificium immoles orationum.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Quantum autem locum apud Deum et sanctos eius fidelium orationes obtineant, et maxime mulierum pro caris suis et uxorum pro viris, multa nobis occurrunt testimonia et exempla. Quod diligenter attendens Apostolus sine intermissione orare nos admonet. Legimus Dominum Moysi dixisse: Dimitte me ut irascatur furor meus. Et Ieremiae<em>: Tu vero, inquit, noli orare pro populo hoc . . . et non obsistas mihi.</em> Ex quibus videlicet verbis manifeste Dominus ipse profitetur orationes sanctorum quasi quoddam frenum irae ipsius immittere quo scilicet ipsa coerceatur ne, quantum merita peccantium exigunt, ipsa in eos saeviat, et quem ad vindictam iustitia quasi spontaneum ducit. amicorum supplicatio flectat et tamquam invitum quasi vi quadam retineat. Sic quippe oranti vel oraturo dicitur: <em>Dimitte me et ne obsistas mihi.</em> Praecipit Dominus ne oretur pro impiis. Orat iustus, Domino prohibente, et ab ipso impetrat quod postulat et irati iudicis sententiam immutat. Sic quippe de Moyse subiunctum est: <em>Et placatus factus est Dominus de malignitate quam dixit facere populo suo.</em> Scriptum est alibi de universis operibus Dei: Dixit, et facta sunt. Hoc autem loco et dixisse memoratur quod de afflictione populus meruerat et virtute orationis praeventus non implesse quod dixerat.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Attende itaque quanta sit orationis virtus, si quod iubemur oremus, quando id quod orare Prophetam Deus prohibuit, orando tamen obtinuit, et ab eo quod dixerat eum avertit. Cui et alius propheta dicit: <em>Et cum iratus fueris, misericordiae recordaberis</em>. Audiant id atque advertant principes terreni qui occasione praepositae et edictae iustitiae suae obstinati magis quam iusti reperiuntur, et se remissos videri erubescunt, si misericordes fiant, et mendaces si edictum suum mutent, vel quod minus provide statuerunt non impleant, et si verba rebus emendent. Quos quidem recte dixerim Iephtae comparandos qui quod stulte voverat stultius adimplens unicam interfecit. Qui vero eius membrum fieri cupit, &lt;ei&gt; cum Psalmista dicit: <em>Misericordiam et iudicium cantabo tibi, Domine; misericordia</em>, sicut scriptum est, <em>iudicium exaltat</em> attendens quod alibi Scriptura comminatur: <em>Iudicium sine misericordia in eum qui misericordiam non facit.</em> Quod diligenter ipse Psalmista considerans, ad supplicationem uxoris Nabal Carmeli iuramentum quod ex iustitia fecerat, de viro eius scilicet et ipsius domo delenda per misericordiam cassavit. Orationem itaque iustitiae praetulit et quod vir deliquerat supplicatio uxoris delevit.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; In quo quidem tibi, soror, exemplum proponitur et securitas datur ut, si huius oratio apud hominem tantum obtinuit, quid apud Deum tua pro me audeat instruaris. Plus quippe Deus qui pater est noster filios diligit quam David feminam supplicantem. Et ille quidem pius et misericors habebatur, sed ipsa pietas et misericordia Deus est. Et quae tunc supplicabat mulier saecularis erat et laica nec ex sanctae devotionis professione Domino copulata. Quod si ex te minus ad impetrandum sufficias, sanctus qui tecum est tam virginum quam viduarum conventus, quod per te non potes, obtinebit. Cum enim discipulis Veritas dicat: <em>Ubi duo vel tres congregati fuerint in nomine meo, ibi sum in&nbsp; medio eorum.</em> Et rursum: <em>Si duo ex vobis consenserint de omni re quam petierint, fiet illud, a Patre meo</em>, quis non videat quantum apud Deum valeat sanctae congregationis frequens oratio? Si, ut Apostolus asserit, multum valet oratio iusti assidua, quid de multitudine sanctae congregationis sperandum est?&nbsp;<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Nosti, carissima soror, ex homilia beati Gregorii XXXVIII quantum suffragium invito seu contradicenti fratri oratio fratrum mature attulerit. De quo iam ad extremum ducto, quanta periculi anxietate miserrima eius anima laboraret et quanta desperatione et taedio vitae fratres ab oratione revocaret, quid ibi diligenter scriptum sit tuam minime latet prudentiam.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Atque utinam confidentius te et sanctarum conventum sororum ad orationem invitet ut me scilicet vobis ipse vivum custodiat, per quem, Paulo attestante, mortuos etiam suos de resurrectione mulieres acceperunt. Si enim Veteris et Evangelici Testamenti paginas revolvas, invenies maxima resuscitationis miracula solis vel maxime feminis exhibita fuisse, pro ipsis vel de ipsis facta. Duos quippe mortuos suscitatos ad supplicationes maternas Vetus commemorat Testamentum, per Eliam, scilicet, et ipsius discipulum Elisaeum.&nbsp;<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Evangelium vero trium tantum mortuorum suscitationem a Domino factam continent quae mulieribus exhibita maxime illud quod supra commemoravimus Apostolicum dictum rebus ipsis confirmant: <em>Acceperunt mulieres de resurrectione mortuos suos. </em>Filium quippe viduae ad portam civitatis Nairn suscitatum matri reddidit eius compassione compunctus. Lazarum quoque amicum suum ad obsecrationem sororum eius, Mariae videlicet ac Marthae, suscitavit. Quo etiam archisynagogi filiae hanc ipsam gratiam ad petitionem patris impendente, <em>mulieres de resurrectione mortuos suos acceperunt, </em>cum haec videlicet suscitata proprium de morte receperit corpus, sicut illae corpora suorum. Et paucis quidem intervenientibus hae factae sunt resuscitationes. Vitae vero nostrae conservationem multiplex vestrae devotionis oratio facile obtinebit. Quarum tam abstinentia quam continentia Deo sacrata, quanto ipsi gratior habetur, tanto ipsum propitiorem inveniet. Et plerique fortassis horum qui suscitati sunt nec fideles exstiterunt, sicut nec vidua praedicta, cui non roganti filium Dominus suscitavit, fidelis exstitisse legitur. Nos autem invicem non solum fidei colligat&nbsp; integritas, verum etiam eiusdem religionis professio sociat.&nbsp;<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Ut autem sacrosanctum collegii vestri nunc omittam conventum, in quo plurimarum virginum ac viduarum devotio Domino iugiter deservit, ad te unam veniam, cuius apud Deum sanctitatem plurimum non ambigo posse, et quae potes mihi praecipue debere, maxime nunc in tantae adversitatis laboranti discrimine. Memento itaque semper in orationibus tuis eius qui specialiter est tuus; et tanto confidentius in oratione vigila, quanto id esse tibi recognoscis iustius, et ob hoc ipsi qui orandus est acceptabilius. Exaudi, obsecro, aure cordis, quod saepius audisti aure corporis. Scriptum est in Proverbiis: <em>Mulier diligens corona est viro suo. </em>Et rursum: <em>Qui invenit mulierem bonam, invenit bonum; et hauriet iucunditatem a Domino. </em>Et iterum: <em>Domus et divitiae dantur a parentibus, a Domino autem proprie uxor prudens</em>. Et in Ecclesiastico: <em>Mulieris bonae beatus vir. </em>Et post pauca: <em>Pars bona, mulier bona</em>. Et iuxta auctoritatem Apostolicam:&nbsp;<em>Sanctificatus est vir infidelis per mulierem fidelem.</em><br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Cuius quidem rei experimentum in regno praecipue nostro, id est, Francorum, divina specialiter exhibuit gratia, cum ad orationem videlicet uxoris magis quam ad sanctorum praedicationem, Clodoveo rege ad fidem Christi converso, regnum sic universum divinis legibus mancipaverunt ut exemplo maxime superiorum ad orationis instantiam inferiores provocarentur. Ad quam quidem instantiam Dominica nos vehementer invitans parabola: <em>Ille, </em>inquit,<em> si perseveraverit pulsans, dico vobis quia si non dabit ei eo quod amicus illius sit, propter improbitatem tamen eius surgens dabit ei quotquot habet necessarios,</em> etc. Ex hac profecto, ut ita dicam, orationis improbitate, sicut supra memini, Moyses divinae iustitiae severitatem enervavit, et sententiam immutavit.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Nosti, dilectissima, quantum caritatis affectum praesentiae meae conventus olim vester in oratione solitus sit exhibere. Ad expletionem namque quotidie singularum horarum specialem pro me Domino supplicationem hanc offerre consuevit ut, responso proprio cum versu eius praemissis et decantatis, preces his et collectam in hunc modum subiungeret. Responsum: Non me derelinquas, nec discedas a me, Domine. Versus: In adiutorium meum semper intende, Domine, Preces: Salvum fac servum tuum, Deus meus, sperantem in te. Domine exaudi orationem meam, et clamor meus ad te veniat. Oratio: Deus qui per servulum tuum ancillulas tuas in nomine tuo dignatus es aggregare, te quaesumus ut tam ipsi quam nobis in tua tribuas perseverantiam voluntate. Per Dominum, etc.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Nunc autem absenti mihi, tanto amplius orationum vestrarum opus est suffragio, quanto maioris anxietate periculi constringor. Supplicando itaque postulo, postulando supplico quatinus praecipue nunc absens experiar quam vera caritas vestra erga absentem exstiterit, singulis videlicet horis expletis, hunc orationis propriae modum adnectens. Responsum: Ne derelinquas me, Domine, pater et dominator vitae meae ut non corruam in conspectu adversariorum meorum, ne gaudeat de me inimicus meus. Versus: Apprehende arma et scutum, et exsurge in adiutorium mihi ne gaudeat, etc. Preces: Salvum fac servum tuum, Deus meus, sperantem in te. Mitte ei, Domine, auxilium de sancto et de Sion tuere eum. Esto ei, Domine, turris fortitudinis a facie inimici. Domine, exaudi orationem meam, et clamor meus ad te veniat. Oratio: Deus qui per servum tuum ancillulas tuas in nomine tuo dignatus es aggregare, te quaesumus ut eum ab omni adversitate protegas et ancillis tuis incolumem reddas. Per Dominum, etc.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Quod si me Dominus in manus inimicorum tradiderit, scilicet, ut ipsi praevalentes me interficiant, aut quocumque casu viam universae carnis absens vobis ingrediar, cadaver, obsecro, nostrum ubicumque vel sepultum vel expositum iacuerit, ad coemeterium vestrum deferri faciatis ubi filiae vestrae, immo in Christo sorores, sepulcrum nostrum saepius videntes, ad preces pro me Domino fundendas amplius invitentur. Nullum quippe locum animae dolenti de peccatorum suorum errore desolatae tutiorem ac salubriorem arbitror quam eum qui vero Paraclito, id est consolatori, proprie consecratus est, et de eius nomine specialiter insignitus. Nec Christianae sepulturae locum rectius apud aliquos fideles quam apud feminas Christo devotas consistere censeo. Quae de Domini Jesu Christi sepultura sollicitae eam unguentis pretiosis et praevenerunt et subsecutae sunt et circa eius sepulcrum studiose vigilantes et sponsi mortem lacrymabiliter plangentes, sicut scriptum est: Mulieres sedentes ad monumentum lamentabantur flentes Dominum. Primo ibidem de resurrectione eius angelica apparitione et allocutione sunt consolatae, et statim ipsius resur rectionis gaudia, eo bis eis apparente, percipere meruerunt et manibus contrectare.<br>&nbsp; &nbsp; Illud autem demum super omnia postulo ut quae nunc de corporis mei periculo nimia sollicitudine laboratis, tunc praecipue de salute animae sollicitae quantum dilexeritis vivum exhibeatis defuncto, orationum videlicet vestrarum speciali quodam et proprio suffragio.</p><p><span>Vive, vale, vivantque tuae valeantque sorores.</span></p><p><span>Vivite, sed Christo; quaeso, mei memores</span></p><p><span>&nbsp;</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Abelard, responding to Heloise’s request for attention and instruction, tells her how much more effective the prayers of women are than those of men, but promises to send anything Heloise requests that pertains to God.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><ul><li>Gregory,&nbsp;<i>Homiliae in Evangelia</i>&nbsp;2.38, 16:&nbsp; PL76, 1292b.</li></ul><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>J.T. Muckle, "The Personal letters between Abelard and Heloise," <em>Medieval Studies</em> 15 (1953), ep.2, p.73-77.&nbsp;&nbsp;<span>Translation&nbsp;</span><span>by Mary Martin McLaughlin</span><span>,&nbsp;</span><i>The Letters of Heloise and Abelard</i><span>,&nbsp;</span><span>ed. Bonnie Wheeler (Palgrave Macmillan, 2009), reprinted here with the generous permission of the editor.&nbsp;&nbsp;</span>Also in&nbsp;Betty Radice,&nbsp;<em>The Letters of Abelard and Heloise</em>&nbsp;(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974), p.119-26.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1130-34