---
letter_id: "23900"
title: "A letter from Innocent II, pope (1131)"
ititle: "a letter from innocent ii, pope (1131)"
ltr_date: "1131"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-29"
url: "/letter/193.html"
senders:
  - id: 21418
    name: Innocent II, pope
    iname: innocent ii, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 28
    name: Heloise, abbess of the Paraclete
    iname: heloise, abbess of the paraclete
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Bishop Innocent, servant of the servants of God, to his beloved daughters in Christ Heloise, prioress, and the other sisters committed to divine service in the oratory of
the Holy Trinity, which is situated in the district of Troyes, in the parish of Quincey, on the Aube river, in the present as in the future in perpetuity.  Whenever we are asked for what is known to be reasonable, it is fitting that we grant it with willing spirit, and to bestow rights appropriate to the desires of those asking.  Therefore beloved daughters in the Lord, giving assent to your just requests, we take under the protection of the apostolic see the monastery of the Holy Trinity, in which you devote yourself to divine service, and we secure it by the page of
the present writing, fixing that whatever possessions, whatever goods you possess justly and legitimately in the present or in the future by the granting of popes, the liberality of kings or princes, the offerings of the faithful or by other just means you may acquire with God’s favor, remain yours firm and unimpaired in perpetuity.  Indeed, the tenth (tithe) of your labors which you gather from your own possessions or the annual income we grant you to possess without any opposition.  It is forbidden therefore to any man to rashly disturb said monastery or take away its possessions, or retain what has
been taken, or diminish or to harass them with any troubles, but all these are to be preserved whole perpetually in the future with all your usages.  As a
token of this freedom received from the Roman church, you pay six pennies annually to the Lateran palace.  If in the future any ecclesiastical or lay person, knowing this
page of our disposition, should attempt to rashly oppose it, and warned a second and third [time], if he does not amend with suitable satisfaction, will lose the dignity/rank of his power and honor and be alienated from the most sacred body and blood of God and our Lord redeemer Jesus Christ, and be subject to strict punishment to
the furthest extent (torture).  Preserving them, on the other hand, with the intervening merits of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul, will achieve the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ and the rewards of eternal happiness.  Amen.
I, Innocent, bishop of the catholic Church.
Dated at Auxerre, by the hand of Alderic deacon cardinal and chancellor of the holy roman Church, 4th cal. of December, 10th indiction, in the year of the Lord’s
incarnation, 1131, truly, in the 2nd year of the pontificate of lord pope Innocent II.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Innocentius episcopus, servus servorum Dei, dilectis in Christo filiabus Heloissae priorissae, caeterisque sororibus in oratorio Sanctae Trinitatis, quod in pago Trecensi, in parrochia Quinceii, supra fluvium Arduconem situm est, divino famulatui mancipatis tam praesentibus quam futuris in perpetuum. petentium desideriis congruum impertiri suffragium.  Quotiens illud a nobis petitur quod rationi cognoscitur convenire, animo nos decet libenti concedere, et petentium desideriis congruum impertiri suffragium.  Proinde dilectae in Domino filiae, vestris justis postulationibus assensum praebentes, monasterium Sanctae Trinitatis, in quo divino vacatis servitio sub apostolicae sedis protectione suscipimus, et praesentis scripti pagina communimus, statuentes ut quascunque possessiones, quaecunque bona in praesentiarum juste et legitime possidetis, aut in futurum concessione pontificum, liberalitate regum vel principum, oblatione fidelium seu aliis justis modis praestante Domino poteritis adipisci, firma vobis in perpetuum et illibata permaneant.  Sane laborum vestrorum decimas quas propriis excolitis sumptibus, seu annualium absque contradictione aliqua vobis concedimus possidendas.  Nulli ergo hominum fas sit praefatum monasterium temere perturbare, aut ejus possesisones auferre, vel ablatas reinere, minuere, aut aliquibus vexationibus fatigare, sed haec omnia integra conserventur, vestris usibus perpetuo profutura.  Ad indicium autem perceptae hujus a romana Ecclesia libertatis, sex nummos quotannis Lateranensi palatio persolvetis.  Si qua igitur in futurum ecclesiastica secularisve persona hanc nostrae constitutionis paginam sciens, contra eam temere venire tentaverit, secundo tertioque commonita, si non satisfactione congrua emendaverit, potestatis honorisque sui dignitate careat, et a sacratissimo corpore ac sanguine Dei et Domini redemptoris nostri Jesu Christi aliena fiat, atque in extremo examine districtae ultioni subjaceat.  Conservantes autem, intervenientibus beatorum apostolorum Petri et Pauli meritis, gratiam Domini nostri Jesu Christi et aeternae felicitatis praemia consequantur.  Amen.
Ego Innocentius catholicae Ecclesiae episcopus.  Datum Autissiodori, per manum Aldierici sanctae romane Ecclesiae diaconi cardinalis et cancellarii, IV cal.decembris, ind.X, incarnationis Dominicae anno MCXXXI pontificatus vero domini Innocentii papae II, anno II.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>There are three letters from pope Innocent II to Heloise, addressed as prioress in the first and abbess in the other two, and to the other sisters in the oratory of the Holy Trinity, confirming present and future possessions of the oratory of the Holy Trinity (the Paraclete).  The first two take the monastery under papal protection and forbid harrassment from anyone, ecclesiastical or lay.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Opera Petri Abaelardi</em> ed. V. Cousin, 2v (Paris: A Durand, 1849, 1859), Appendix IX.i, 1.719-20 and PL179, ep.70 c114-15</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1131