---
letter_id: "23712"
title: "A letter from Adalbero, archbishop of Reims (c.984-985)"
ititle: "a letter from adalbero, archbishop of reims (c.984-985)"
ltr_date: "c.984-985"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/2.html"
senders:
  - id: 21197
    name: Adalbero, archbishop of Reims
    iname: adalbero, archbishop of reims
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 2
    name: Beatrice, countess/duke of Upper Lorraine
    iname: beatrice, countess/duke of upper lorraine
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>About those things which you asked us to let you know more certainly, we know nothing beyond what we have said in person or you have heard from our legation.  For the rest, we desire for you, that with the royal honor safe you succeed in your purpose for your friends unimpeded and if you do, we rejoice with you.  Think our business yours.  Towards duke Hugo presume our pure mind with constant faith and without hesitation.  And what we have asked from you, at its time we will apply to your service.  We are especially grateful to you that we are more certain about many things from you.  We have heard that the monk Meing[auz] on the petition of abbot Rai[nard] has left Corbie as he long desired and gone to Rouen.  In which, if we have the opportunity we will attempt to do your will in all things.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Super his, quae certius vobis significari quaeritis, nil amplius novimus, quam aut praesentes diximus aut legatione nostra accepistis. Ceterum vobis, liberis, amicis ad votem bene prosperari salvo honore regio et optamus et, si fit, congratulamur.  Nostra negotia vestra putate. Apud ducem Hugonem de nostra mente pura, fide constanti absque haesitatione praesumite. Denique quod a vobis exigimus, suo tempore vestro obsequio impendemus. In primis quoque gratias habemus, quod de plurimis a vobis certiores existimus. Meing monachum ex petitione abbatis Rai.  diu perquisitum Corbeiam liquisse, Rothomagum adisse audivimus. In quo si dabitur facultas, vestrum velle in omnibus exequi conabimur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The letter refers to an exchange of service and of information, by word of mouth, and empowers Beatrice to speak and act for Adalbero with her brother.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH BDKz, 2 (Gerbert of Reims), ep.61, p.92-93, dated June/July 985; also HGF9, ep.28 p.282 (dated 984), and PL137 ep.14 c510. The texts are the same, with one exception, "nostra mente pura," in MGH, "vestra" in HGF and PL.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.984-985