---
letter_id: "23922"
title: "A letter from Matilda of Tuscany, countess of Tuscany, duchess of Lorraine (1106)"
ititle: "a letter from matilda of tuscany, countess of tuscany, duchess of lorraine (1106)"
ltr_date: "1106"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-08"
url: "/letter/215.html"
senders:
  - id: 29
    name: Matilda of Tuscany, countess of Tuscany, duchess of Lorraine
    iname: matilda of tuscany, countess of tuscany, duchess of lorraine
    type: woman
    url: /woman/29.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of almighty god, Matilda, by the grace of god if she is anything, this memorandum to the times of her successors.
Since it is human to sin but diabolical to persevere in it, considering with god’s inspiration, how much labor and danger was incurred by travellers from the moving of the public street which used to go from the port of Coparmulo and how much harm and discomfort the church of Parma suffered from the loss of that port because of this change, observing justice and reason, not wishing that to continue, but prohibiting it altogether in the present and future, we wish it known by these letters that we have recalled said street to its former place and established that from now on it be directed through the port of Coparmulo according to the earlier route with all impediments by us and ours removed for all time.
But if anyone should presume, which we do not believe, to change or transfer this ordinance of ours, let him know without doubt that he incurs our ill will and we will not let it go unpunished.  If it should by chance happen through our people, whoever it is will be subject to pay a penalty of 20 pounds to our chamber.  To the notice and memory of which we have ordered this page to be  composed and validated by our hand and we have commanded that it be placed and kept on the altar of St. Mary, in whose honor and reverence we have done this and promised to observe it inviolably.
I, Matilda, by the grace of god if she is anything, have subscribed.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine omnipotentis dei.  M[atilda] dei gratia, si quid est, memoriale hoc suis successorumque temporibus.  Quia humanum est peccare, sed diabolicum perseverare, considerantes deo inspirante, quantum laboris atque periculi in transmutatione strate publice, que per portum de Coparmuli olim fieri consueverat, viantibus accidisset quantumque damni et incommodi amissione eiusdem portus pro huiusmodi permutatione Parmensis ecclesia pertulisset, iusticie et rationis intuitu ulterius id fieri nolentes et omnino prohibentes futuris et presentibus his literis notum esse volumus supradictam stratam in locum suum nos more solito revocasse ac deinceps per portum Coparmuli iuxta modum pristinum omni tempore dirigi remoto nostri nostrorumque impedimento statuisse.  Si quis vero, quod non credimus, hanc institutionem nostram permutare vel alio transferre presumpserit, sciat se procul dubio nostram malam voluntatem incurrere et inultum nos nullo modo pretermittere.  Quod si per nostros fortasse contigerit, quisquis ille fuerit, poene XX librarum camere nostre obnoxius subiacebit.  Ad cuius rei noticiam atque memoriam hanc paginam conscribi precepimus nostrisque manibus roboratam altari sancte Marie superponi et haberi mandavimus, cuius honore et reverentia hoc egimus et inviolabiliter observare promittimus.
Matilda dei gratia, si quid est, subscripsi.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Matilda orders streets which have been rerouted to be put back on their old course.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Manuscript source:</h2>Parma, Archivio capitolare, pergamene sec.XII, #366
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Die Urkunden und Briefe der Markgräfin Mathilde von Tuszien,</em> ed. Elke Goez and Werner Goez (Hanover: Hahnsche Buchhandlung, 1998), 96</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1106