---
letter_id: "23930"
title: "A letter from Gregory VII, pope (10/16/1074)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory vii, pope (10/16/1074)"
ltr_date: "10/16/1074"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-03-31"
url: "/letter/223.html"
senders:
  - id: 21367
    name: Gregory VII, pope
    iname: gregory vii, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 20
    name: Beatrice of Lorraine, duke of Tuscany
    iname: beatrice of lorraine, duke of tuscany
    type: woman
  - id: 29
    name: Matilda of Tuscany, countess of Tuscany, duchess of Lorraine
    iname: matilda of tuscany, countess of tuscany, duchess of lorraine
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory [bishop, servant of the servants of God] to D[uke] Beatrice and her daughter Matilda, greeting [and apostolic benediction].

It will not have escaped your notice that various reports have reached me about you, as is usually the case where the affection and unity of friends are the object of envy.  Indeed if we chose to listen to such tales there are but few in whose sincere devotion we could trust.  But, without any suspicion whatsoever, we say to you in all truth that we have no more confidence in any prince of this world than in you, and this we have learned from your words, your deeds, your pious zeal and the splendid steadfastness of your faith.  Nor have we any doubt that your regard for us shines with a pure light; for the servant is beloved through Peter and in Peter his servant.

This will inform you that, contrary to the expectation of all my attendants, I have overcome the weakness of my body and am now in good health again — a cause for mourning rather than for rejoicing.  For my soul longed with great desire for that fatherland where he who has a care for labor and sorrow grants rest and refreshment to the weary.

But, preserved thus far for our accustomed labors and our endless anxieties, we suffer hour by hour, as it were, the pangs of a woman in labor, so that we scarce hold the rudder of the ship that is sinking before our eyes.  The law and the religion of Christ heve almost everywhere so completely gone to ruin that Saracens or whatever pagans you please are holding more firmly to their usages than those who have received the Christian name and for whom is prepared an inheritance of eternal glory in their Father's kingdom are guarding the precepts of the law of God.  So it is no wonder that we long to desert the fortress of this life in the hope of divine consolation, seeing that, placed as we are, we pay the penalty by the mere contemplation of the perils that crowd in upon us.

Be it further known to you that Robert Guiscard has often sent word to us that he desires to place himself in our hands with promises of loyalty as binding as any that could or ought to be given by anyone to any lord.  But, considering certain good reasons why this should be postponed until now, we are awaiting the decision of divine judgment and of our apostolic representatives.  Besides, we are informed that one of you [Beatrice] is proposing to cross the Alps at about this time, but we are extremely anxious to have an interview with you both before then, desiring to have your advice in our affairs as our sisters and daughters of St. Peter.  As for ourself, you may have every confidence that whatsoever we know or can do by God's grace is frankly laid before you, and be assured that you are remembered daily in our prayers and earnestly commended to God by us, sinful though we be.

Further, you are aware that Marquis Azzo [of Este] has given us his solemn promise to present himself before us whenever he shall be summoned to render an account of his marriage.  We have therefore sent a summons in this case to him, to William, bishop of Pavia, and to Herbert, bishop of Modena, who are acquainted with the relationships of the woman, in order that we may get at the truth of the matter and, with God's help, render a just decree.  Wherefore may it be your good pleasure to notify the aforesaid marquis by trusty messengers that he is free to pass through your territory, both going and returning, so that no fear of violence from you may interfere with the working of Christian law in this case.1

Dated at Rome, 17th kalends of November, Indiction 13.


<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Non vos fugit varios sepe ad nos rumores de vobis afferri, sicut mos eorum est, qui amicorum dilectioni invident et unanimitati.  Et quidem, si nos talibus aures, quod absit, acclinare vellemus, non multi sunt, in quibus sincere dilectionis affectum nobis patere crederemus.  Sed nos nihil fere potius quam suspectum animum fugientes in veritate vobis loquimur, quod in nullis terrarum principibus tutius quam in vestra nobilitate confidimus, quoniam hoc verba hoc facta hoc pie devotionis studia hoc fidei vestre preclara nos constantia docuerunt.  Nec dubitamus, quin vestra in nobis ver nitescat caritas, cum per Petrum servus et Petrus in servo diligitur.

De cetero scitote nos preter spem omnium qui nobiscum erant infirmitatem corporis evasisse et iam bonam valitudinem recepisse.  Unde nobis dolendum potius quam gaudendum esse putamus.  Tendebat enim anima nostra et toto desiderio ad illam patriam anhelabat, in qua ille, qui laborem et dolorem considerat, lassis quitem et refrigerium prestat.  Verum reservati adhuc ad consuetos labores et finitas sollicitudines in singulas horas quasi parturientis dolores et angustias patimur, dum pene in oculis nostris naufragantem ecclesiam nullo valemus eripere gubernaculo.

Lex enim et religio christiana ita fere ubique deperiit, ut Sarraceni et quilibet pagani suos ritus firmius teneant, quam illi, qui christianum nomen acceperunt et quibus in regno patris per Christum hereditas et eterne vite gloria parata est, divine legis mandata custodiant.  Quo minus mirandum est, si huius lucis erumnas spe superne consolationis fugere cupimus, qui in his positi in sola cognitione inundantium periculorum singulorum penas luimus.  

Preterea scitote Robertum Guiscardum sepe supplices legatos ad nos mittere et tanta fidelitatis securitate se in manus nostras dari cupere, ut nemo unquam firmiori obligatione se cuilibet domino debeat vel possit astringere.  Sed nos non incertas rationes, cur illud sit adhuc differendum, considerante superne dispensationis et apostolice procurationis consilia prestolamur.  Ad hec alteram vestrum hoc in tempore transalpinaturam intelleximus, sed prius, si fieri posset, ambarum colloquio uti multum desideramus, quoniam vestra consilia sicut sororum nostrarum et filiarum sancti Petri in causis et negotiis nostris habere desideramus.  De nobis vero, quicquid per Deum et recte sapimus et valemus, in omni caritatis exhibitione vobis patere confidite et memoriam vestram in nostris cotidie orationibus haberi et, quamquam peccatores simus, intente Deo commendari scitote.

Preterea notum vobis est marchionem Azzonem in synodo nobis promisisse et fidem in manum nostram dedisse se in nostram presentiam, quandocunque eum commoneremus pro reddenda ratione sui coniugii venturum.  Et nos quidem hac de causa ipsum vocavimus; Guilielmum Papiensem episcopum et Heribertum Mutinensem, qui propinquitatem mulieris sciunt, ad nos venire per epistolas nostras invitavimus, quatenus rei veritate percognita quod iustum fuerit Deo adiuvante statuamus.  Quapropter dignum nobis videtur, ut prefato marchioni per certum nuntium vestrum mandetis, quatenus per terram vestram in eundo et redeundo securus transire possit, ne occasione vestri timoris in hac parte iustitia christiane legis detrimentum sentiat.

Data Rome XVII. Kalendas Novembris. Indictione XIII.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Gregory addressed this and several other letters to Matilda and her mother Beatrice, who ruled jointly until Beatrice¹s death.  Gregory affirms his trust in them despite reports of envious rumors, announces his recovery though his state of mind is bleak, reports on a possible political alliance about which he wants to consult them, and on a marriage that has been challenged.  The potential ally is Robert Guiscard who was invested with his Italian territories by pope Nicholas II in 1059 and promised to be a vassal of the Roman church and to protect the pope.  He was excommunicated by Gregory from 1073-79 because of attacks on papal territories, but reinvested with his fiefs in 1080 and it was Robert who rescued Gregory when Henry IV came to Rome in 1084 and accompanied him to Salerno where Gregory died in 1085.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)  Reprinted with permission of the publisher.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Register Gregors VII</em>, MGH, <em>EpSel,</em> ed. Erich Caspar, ep.2.9; translation from<em> The Correspondence of Pope Gregory VII</em>, Selected Letters from the Registrum, trans. Ephraim Emerton, pp.45-46(1).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>10/16/1074