---
letter_id: "23941"
title: "A letter from Paschal II, pope ()"
ititle: "a letter from paschal ii, pope ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-11"
url: "/letter/234.html"
senders:
  - id: 21498
    name: Paschal II, pope
    iname: paschal ii, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 29
    name: Matilda of Tuscany, countess of Tuscany, duchess of Lorraine
    iname: matilda of tuscany, countess of tuscany, duchess of lorraine
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>It has come to our attention that the abbot of Frassinoro looted the church at Carpi on the excuse of a certain rent which it did not know it had to pay.  When the archpriest asked us about it, we answered what certainly seemed reasonable.  A rent that is not known [to the one assessed] is not to be found in divine or human laws.  It is appropriate that all rents should be made known and what and how it should be paid.  We charge your love, therefore, that you have that loot restored to the church of Carpens, and not permit the abbot of Frassinoro or anyone else to bother it.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Pervenit ad nos quod Fraxinorensis abbas Carpensem ecclesiam fuerit depraedatus, occasione videlicet cujusdam census, qui ad quid solvi debeat ignoratur. De quo nimirum cum nos archipresbyter interrogaret, quod rationabile videbatur respondimus. Census enim ignorantiae, nec divinis nec humanis legibus invenitur. Oportet quippe ut census omnis ad quid et quomodo solvi debeat praesciatur. Mandamus ergo dilectioni tuae ut praedam ipsam Carpensi ecclesiae restitui facias, nec deinceps Fraxinorensem abbatem aut quemlibet alium eam inquietare permittas.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Paschal asks Matilda to enforce his decision in a complaint brought by a church against an abbot.  Robert Somerville notes that this text is known only through the canon law tradition; it appeared in the Decretals of Gregory IX in 1234 and remained in canon law until 1917.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>PL163 c.366, ep.408
