---
letter_id: "23740"
title: "A letter from AEthelweard ()"
ititle: "a letter from aethelweard ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-07"
url: "/letter/23740.html"
senders:
  - id: 21203
    name: AEthelweard
    iname: aethelweard
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 10
    name: Matilda, abbess of Essen
    iname: matilda, abbess of essen
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In embarking upon the theme of this book there will not be any need to make introductory remarks, my most beloved one. Since we have directed our pen through digressions of many kinds from the [original] state of all, and since passing over matters, upon which the knowledge of many people touched, we leave to the wise reader a more profound selection from [the facts of] history divine and secular, now it furthermore behoves us to direct our pen to the qualities of our own race. Although the pupil is not described as a member of high repute, it nevertheless affords no small service to the larger members. And so we urge it in the Lord, that our works should not be despised by those who relish abuse, but that men should rather, if they have depth of understanding, return abundant thanks to the king of heaven.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In exordio positionis huius libelli non opus fuerit praeapitulari, charissima nostri. Quoniam per multimodos etiam anfractus duximus stilum ab ipso generalissimo statu, ac transilientes ea in quibus multorum adhaesit notitia, excerpta ab historia tam diuina quam uulgari altiora prudenti lectori linquimus, ad nostri etiam generis proprietatem nunc calamum dirigere oportet, et quamuis non famose pupilla dicitur membrum, ueruntamen ministerium praestat non exiguum maioribus membris. Itaque hortamur in domino ne nostra spernantur a phagolidoris dicta, sed potius praeopimas regi coelorum gratias reddant, si se sapere alta uidentur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Matilda commissioned or requested a history of her distinguished English forebears from an English cousin, AEthelweard, who apparently adapted the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle into Latin for her.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Chronicon AEthelweardi, The Chronicle of AEthelweard</em>, ed. A. Campbell (London: Thomas Nelson, 1962), prologue to book 2, p.14-15.</p>