---
letter_id: "23743"
title: "A letter from Widukind ()"
ititle: "a letter from widukind ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-11"
url: "/letter/23743.html"
senders:
  - id: 21617
    name: Widukind
    iname: widukind
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 11
    name: Matilda, abbess of Quedlinburg
    iname: matilda, abbess of quedlinburg
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the virginal flower with imperial majesty and singular wisdom, the striking lady/ruler Matilda, Widukind of Corvey, last of the little servants of Christ and the martyrs Stephen and Vitus, the most devoted servitude of total service and true salvation in the saviour.
Though the singular glory of paternal power and the brightest wisdom adorn you, yet our humility presumes on the clemency always near the scepter that our devotion will be received by your piety even if it does not deserve to be.  For with our labor, you will read the things done and handed down in memory of your most powerful father and most glorious grandfather, from which you may become from best and very glorious, better and more glorious.  We can not encompass all their deeds — we write in detail but compressed so the speech is clear to the readers and not disagreeable.  But I took care to write a few things about the origin and status of the line, in which Henry was the first to rule, so that by reading them you might delight your spirit, relieve your cares, and fill your time with lovely leisure.  Let your brilliance therefore read this little book mindful of us with that piety with which it is written in devotion.
Fare well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Flore virginali cum maiestate imperiali ac sapientia singulari fulgenti dominae Mahthildae ultimus servulorum Christi martyrum Stephani atque Viti, Corbeius Widukindus, totius servitutis devotissimum famulatum veramque in salvatore salutem. Quamvis te paternae potentiae gloria singularis magnificet ac clarissima decoret sapientia, nostra tamen humilitas presumit de proxima sceptris semper clementia, quia nostra devotio a tua pietate suscipiatur, etiam si non mereatur. Nam cum nostro labore patris potentissimi avique tui gloriosissimi res gestas memoriae traditas legeris, habes, unde ex optima et gloriosissima melior gloriosiorque efficiaris. Nec tamen omnia eorum gesta nos posse comprehendere fatemur, sed strictim et per partes scribimus, ut sermo sit legentibus planus, non fastidiosus. Sed et de origine statuque gentis, in qua ipse rerum dominus Heinricus primus regnavit, pauca scribere curavi ut ea legendi animum oblectes, curas releves, pulchro otio vaces. Legat igitur tua claritas istum libellum ea pietate nostri memor, qua est conscriptus devotione.
Vale.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Widukind dedicated his<em> Res Gestae Saxonicae</em>, a history of their people, to her, which he wrote to provide models for her.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Res Gestae Saxonicae,</em> ed. Albert Bauer and Reinhold Rau, <em>Quellen zur Geschichte der Sachsischen Kaiserzeit</em> (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971), preface to book one</p>