---
letter_id: "23758"
title: "A letter from Marie, duchess of Burgundy ()"
ititle: "a letter from marie, duchess of burgundy ()"
ltr_date: "1163-64?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-10"
url: "/letter/23758.html"
senders:
  - id: 16
    name: Marie of Champagne, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: marie of champagne, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/16.html
receivers:
  - id: 21455
    name: Louis VII, King of France
    iname: louis vii, king of france
    type: people
    url: /people/21455.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most illustrious king of the French, Louis, her most beloved lord, Marie, duchess of Burgundy, greetings, [offering] herself as a footstool for his feet.
When I was to come to make my plea in your presence, so that I might recover my right by your justice, a messenger of the Duke came to me, to countermand it.  I was coming to you nonetheless.  But meanwhile I was advised to go to the lord Pope, since I had not yet carried out the business that pertained to him.  So that I may do so, therefore, I am going to him.  For which reason I send my messenger to your highness, that you may send word back of whatever day you fix for my very bad son.  Indeed, driven out and in exile, I who was once rich, am now like a beggar; once a duchess, now truly without power, suppliant and humble, prostrate at the feet of your royal majesty, miserable and tearful, I beg you to have mercy on me and deign to act so that through your mercy I may recover my dowry which has not yet been given to anyone else.  After God, truly, all my hope is in you.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Illustrissimo Francorum Regi Ludovico, amantissimo domino suo, M. Ducissa Burgundae, salutem, et se ipsam scabellum pedum suorum. Dum venirem ad placitum meum in vestram praesentiam, ut vestra justitia meum jus recuperarem, venit nuncius Ducis ad me, qui mihi placitum contramandavit. Non ideo tamen ad vos minus veniebam. Sed interea meum consilium fuit, ut ad dominum Papam, irem, quia negotium meum, quantum ad ipsum pertinet, nondum perfeceram. Ut igitur perficiam, ad ipsum vado. Quocirca nuncium meum vestrae celsitudini mitto, ut mihi diem, quam pessimo filio meo qualicumque statuatis, mihi remandetis. Ego vero ejecta et exul, quondam dives, nunc quasi mendicans; quondam Ducissa, nunc vero quasi sine potentia, supplex et humilis apud pedes vestrae regiae majestatis prostrata, misera et lacrymabilis exoro ut mei misereamini, et operam dare dignemini ut meam dotem, quae hucusque nulli alii ablata est, per misericordiam vestram recuperem. Post Deum vero tota spes mea in vobis posita est.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Marie tells the king that she is planning to go to the pope, but asks Louis to set a time presumably to settle her claim for her dowry from her son who has seized it and exiled her.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF16, ep.214, p.68, which dates it 1163 or 1164
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1163-64?