---
letter_id: "23947"
title: "A letter from Marbod, bishop of Rennes (c.1096?)"
ititle: "a letter from marbod, bishop of rennes (c.1096?)"
ltr_date: "c.1096?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-28"
url: "/letter/240.html"
senders:
  - id: 21462
    name: Marbod, bishop of Rennes
    iname: marbod, bishop of rennes
    type: people
    url: /people/21462.html
receivers:
  - id: 31
    name: Ermengarde of Anjou, countess of Brittany
    iname: ermengarde of anjou, countess of brittany
    type: woman
    url: /woman/31.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Daughter of Fulk, adornment/glory of Brittany,
beautiful, modest, handsome, shining, brilliant, young,
if you had not known the marriage bed and birth labors,
you could be, in my judgment, Cynthia [Diana].
But though one joined to a man can not be compared to one who is chaste,
the honor given virginity is still possible.
In the married flock, you might be believed one of the goddesses,
first or among the first, o exceedingly beautiful one!
But this beauty of yours, begot by a prince, wife of a prince,
will pass like smoke and swiftly become earth.
Or if your time runs with delayed destiny,
alas what a harsh outrage, you will become an old woman.
Your lovely face is praised, and it is precious,
but death or old age will destroy its value.
The look, flashing with light which wounds those who see it,
and the golden hair, will both be ashes.
Fame reports that no woman surpasses you,
powerful in eloquence, shrewd in counsel.
These also will fail, and be known only in story.
Story tells of ancient learned men.
The shroud is food for moths and worms,
and heaps of gold, fearing thieves,
are like blasts of wind to wise men,
blasts that will pass, but they too perish.
What use is the softness of the bed covered in purple?
Indeed no glory of marriage can prevent death.
Hold the delights of the table as vile dishes,
what is precious becomes nothing just like what is vile.
Who has servants, handmaids, towers, castles, towns,
while alive, loses them in death.
And pelts of ermine, adornments and attendants,
what title of praise do they give you after the tomb?
Why should I hasten to relate all the goods of sea and land
which seem to enrich you in their abundance?
Riches remain with no one,
they go with the world and fall with the falling.
But that you love Christ, that you despise the world,
that you are food and clothing to the poor,
this makes you beautiful and precious to the Lord;
not death nor old age will destroy this wealth.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Filia Fulconis, decus Armoricae regionis,
   Pulchra, pudica, decens, candida, clara, recens,
Si non passa fores thalamos, partusque labores,
   Posses esse meo Cynthia judicio.
Sed quia juncta mari castae nequit aequiparari,
   Est etiam potior virginitatis honor.
In grege nuptarum credi potes una dearum,
   Prima vel in primis, o speciosa nimis!
Sed tuus iste decor, sata principe, principis uxor,
   Transiet ut fumus, et cito fiet humus.
Aut si dilato current tua tempora fato,
   Heu dirum facinus! efficieris anus.
Vultus formosus laudatur, et est pretiosus,
   Sed mors vel senium destruet hoc pretium.
Luce micans acies, quae vulnerat aspicientes,
   Et flavus crinis, fiet utrumque cinis.
Fama refert de te quod non sit femina prae te
   Pollens eloquio, callida consilio.
Haec quoque deficient, et tantum fabula fient.
   Narrat et antiquos fabula doctiloquos.
Stragula blattarum vestis cibus ac tinearum,
   Et metuens fures aurea congeries,
Omni prudenti sic sunt quasi flamina venti,
   Flamina praetereunt, nec minus hoc pereunt.
Mollities lecti quid confert murice tecti?
   Aufert quippe tori gloria nulla mori [f. gaudia posse mori.].
Delicias mensae quasi vilia fercula cense,
   Charum cum vili vertitur in nihili.
Servos, ancillas, cum turribus, oppida, villas
   Quisquis habet vivens, deseret et moriens
Arminiae pelles, exornatusque satelles
   Quem laudis titulum dant tibi post tumulum?
Quid maris et terrae properem bona cuncta referre,
   Quae quasi te ditant, et tibi suppeditant?
Divitiae tales sunt nulli perpetuales,
   Cum mundo vadunt, cumque cadente cadunt.
At quod amas Christum, quod mundum despicis istum
   Et quod pauperibus vestis es atque cibus,
Hoc te formosam facit et Domino pretiosam;
   Nec mors, nec senium destruet hoc pretium.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Interspersed with praise for her beauty, education, and wisdom,  the bishop reminds the young countess that time will destroy it all, while her religious devotion will endure.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>PL171, poem 23 c.1659-60, and partial in J. de Petigny "Lettre Inédite de Robert d'Arbrissel a la comtesse Ermengarde," <em>Bibliothèqie de l'école des chartes,</em> 15 (1853-4), p.213, n.2</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1096?