---
letter_id: "24939"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (593, August)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (593, august)"
ltr_date: "593, August"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/24939.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21362.html
receivers:
  - id: 133
    name: Italica
    iname: italica
    type: woman
    url: /woman/133.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We received your letters full of sweetness, and hearing of your excellency’s good health delighted us.  Regarding these letters we have such great sincerity of mind that paternal affection allows us to detect no enmity hidden in their tranquility.  But let almighty God achieve that just as we have good sentiments about you, so your mind may respond to our goodwill and demonstrate in deeds the sweetness that you express in words.  The most glorious health and beauty of the body on the outside is useless, if a wound lies hidden within.  And we must especially beware of that discord that superficial peace protects.  For in the aforesaid letters what your excellency zealously attempts to recall to our memory, we remember that we have written these things to you, wishing to define to  you without scandal, without public disturbance concerning the trials of the poor, and we know that with God assisting we must restrain ourselves with ecclesiastical moderation from disputes of cases, and, according to that apostolic view, endure the plunder of our property with joy.  But we believe that you know that our silence and patience will not create prejudgment in the affairs of the poor in future pontiffs after me.  Therefore we also, fulfilling our above-mentioned promise, now foresee that we will remain silent about those matters, and we do not wish to entangle ourselves, through ourselves, in those affairs in which we perceive that one acts less than benevolently.  But, glorious daughter, so that from this you do not perhaps conclude that we still completely reject what pertains to an agreement, we have appointed our son Cyprian the deacon, who is coming to the regions of Sicily, so that if you arrange to resolve anything in these matters in a sound manner and without sin in your soul, he should define it with you by our authority, and so that we may be troubled no further by these matters, whose resolution has been achieved with gentleness.  Further, may God almighty, who knows well how to transform what is utterly impossible into possibility, inspire you to resolve your affairs with peaceful intent, and for reward of your soul to be mindful of the poor of this church regarding things belonging (or due) to them.1
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Suscepimus plenas dulcedine litteras uestras, atque incolumitatis excellentiae uestrae nos laetificauit auditus. Circa quas tanta nostrae est mentis sinceritas, ut nihil in earum tranquillitate simultatis reconditum paternus nos suspicari permittat affectus. Sed omnipotens Deus faciat ut, sicut nos de uobis bona sentimus, ita mens uestra nobis bona respondeat, et dulcedinem quam uerbis impenditis exhibeatis operibus. Nihil enim prodest gloriosissima sanitas et pulchritudo in superficie corporis, si uulnus latet intrinsecus. Atque illa magis cauenda est discordia, cui satellitium pax praebet exterior. Illud uero quod in praedictis epistulis reuocare in memoriam nostram excellentia uestra studiose contendit scriptum uobis nihil cum scandalo, nihil cum forali strepitu uobiscum nos uelle de causis pauperum definire, haec nos et scripsisse meminimus, et scimus nosmetipsos, iuuante Domino, a causarum litigiis ecclesiastica moderatione compescere atque, secundum illum apostolicum sensum, rapinam bonorum nostrorum cum gaudio sustinere. Sed illud scire uos credimus, taciturnitatem atque patientiam nostram futuris post me pontificibus in rebus pauperum praeiudicium non facturam. Vnde et nos, explentes supra memoratam promissionem nostram, iam de causis ipsis praeuidimus reticendum, nec in his in quibus minus agi benigne sentimus, desideramus nos per nosmetipsos immiscere negotiis. Sed ne forte ex his coniciatis, gloriosa filia, ea quae ad concordiam pertinent adhuc nos omnino rennuere, filio nostro Cypriano diacono uenienti ad Siciliae partes indiximus ut, si quid de his salubriter et sine peccato animae uestrae ordinate disponitis, ex nostra uobiscum auctoritate definiat, ut nos non amplius illis uexemur negotiis, quorum cum mansuetudine est dispensatus effectus. Deus autem omnipotens, qui ea quae et omnino impossibilia sunt ad possibilitatem bene nouit inflectere, ille uobis aspiret et causas uestras cum pacis intentione disponere, et pro mercede animae uestrae de rebus eis competentibus huius ecclesiae consulere pauperibus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Apparently Italica has taken an action against the poor that Gregory does not approve of, and she has perhaps misrepresented his remarks about it.  Trying to avoid direct controversy, Gregory tells her that he is sending deacon Cyprian, rector of Sicily, to resolve the controversy with her.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>1 Asleigh Imus provided this translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Gregorii Papae Registrum Epistolarum,</em> ed. P. Ewald and L. M. Hartman, MGH, (Berlin: Weidmann 1887-91, repr. Munich, 1978), ep.3.57.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>593, August