---
letter_id: "25197"
title: "A letter from Thibaut II and Matilda"
ititle: "a letter from thibaut ii and matilda"
ltr_date: "1151"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-04-05"
modified: "2021-12-10"
url: "/letter/25197.html"
senders:
  - id: 25196
    name: Matilda of Carinthia
    iname: matilda of carinthia
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25196.html
  - id: 26188
    name: Thibaut II, count of Champagne
    iname: thibaut ii, count of champagne
    type: people
    url: /people/26188.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Let it be known to those in the present and the future that I, Thibaut count of Blois, with the approval of my wife Matilda and my sons Henry, Thibaud, Stephen, confirm to the monastery of Clairvaux whatever Hugo, count of Troyes, my uncle, gave it, and whatever I have given or shall give, which is given from my holding or will be given to the monks of said place, which pertains to their order and customs, among which we especially name and confirm:&nbsp; the territory of Petrecino, whatever is there in our fief, and what was given to them or they have bought, or what will be given from now on or bought for the use of the servants of God; and the vineyards of Barriville which were ours and abandoned and which they rebuilt.&nbsp; And we have given and granted to them the land of Mallis.</p><p>Lest this be damaged or changed with the passage of time, I have signed it with the impression of my seal and the seal of my first-born son, Henry, who already had a part of my land.&nbsp;</p><p>Witnesses of this are Odo of Miroult, Josceran of Pringi, Odo of Mt. Omeri, Odo of Pogeio, Walter of Bernon, Peter Bursaud.</p><p>+Sign of Matilda, countess of Blois. + Sign of Thibaut.&nbsp; Sign of Stephen his brother.</p><p>Enacted this year 1151 from the incarnation.</p><p>Transmitted by the hand of Gaufred of St. Florentinus..</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Notificetur presentibus et futuris, quod ego Theobaldus Blesensis comes, laudante uxore mea Matildi et filiis meis Henrico, Theobaldo, Stephano, confirmo Clarevallensi monasterio, quicquid Hugo, Trecensis comes, avunculus meus dedit ei, et quicquid ego dedi vel daturus sum, quod de casamento meo datum est vel dabitur monachis predicti loci, quod ad ordinem et consuetudinem eorum pertineat, inter que specialiter nominamus et confirmamus: firmagium de Petrecino, quicquid est ibi de feodo nostro, et quod eis datum est, vel quod emerunt, vel quod amodo dabitur, vel quod emetur ad opus servorum Dei; vineas quoque Barriville, que nostre erant atque deserte, quas ipsi reedificaverunt. Et terram de Mallis eis donavimus et concessimus.</p><p>Ne autem hoc aliqua temporum vetustate vel depereat vel mutetur, sigilli mei impressione signavi, et sigillo primogeniti filii mei Henrici, qui jam terre mee partem habebat.</p><p>Hujus rei testes sunt Odo de Miroalt, Josceranus de Pringi, Odo de Monte Omeri, Odo de Pogeio, Galterius de Bernon, Petrus Bursaudus.</p><p>+ Signum Matildis, Blesensis comitisse. -+- Signum Theobaldi. Signum Stephani fratris ejus.</p><p>Actum est hoc anno ab incarnatione MCLI</p><p>Traditum Sancti Florentini per mauum Gaufridi.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>By this charter, Thibaut and Matilda and three of their sons grant lands and vineyards to the monks of Clairvaux and confirm the gifts of Thibaut’s uncle and predecessor, count Hugo.&nbsp; I have included it because Matilda is named at the beginning of the charter, rather than in the middle of the text, and she seals it.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>H. D’Arbois de Jubainville, <em>Histoire des Ducs et des Comtes de Champagne</em> (Paris:&nbsp; Aubry, 1861), 3.438-39, #109.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1151