---
letter_id: "25222"
title: "A Letter from Baldwin of Ramleh"
ititle: "a letter from baldwin of ramleh"
ltr_date: "1177"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-05-08"
modified: "2014-06-30"
url: "/letter/25222.html"
senders:
  - id: 25217
    name: Baldwin of Ramleh
    iname: baldwin of ramleh
    type: people
    url: /people/25217.html
receivers:
  - id: 3
    name: Constance of France, countess of Toulouse
    iname: constance of france, countess of toulouse
    type: woman
    url: /woman/3.html
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Let it be known to all, future as well as present, that I Baldwin, lord of Ramleh, with the counsel and will of my brother, Balian, and also the assent of my daughters, Eschive and Stephanie, grant, approve, and confirm, and corroborate with the impression of my seal, to lady Constance, sister of the king of France, countess of St. Giles, the sale of the secretarial function of her village of Bayt Daras, which George of Beziers made over to said countess for two hundred fifty besants.&nbsp; This was done and composed in the court and presence of my lord Baldwin, sixth king of the Latins of Jerusalem, and in the presence of lady Sibylla, countess of Jaffa and Ascalon, with these witnesses present:&nbsp; prince Reginald, Joscelin of Semmossach, the castellan of Ascalon; William of Mont Gournay; Rohard of St. Abraham, Baldwin of Semmossach, Baldwin of Jerusalem, Reginald the Flemish of Ibelin.&nbsp; This was done in the 1177th year from the incarnation of the Lord, tenth indiction.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Notum sit omnibus, tam futuris quam presentibus, quod ego Balduinus, Ramat­ensis dominus, consilio et voluntate Baliani, fratris mei, necnon et assensu filiarum mearum Eschivje et Stephanie, concedo, laudo et confirmo, meique sigilli impressione corroboro domine Constancie, sorori regis Francie, comitisse S. Egidii, vendit[ionem] scribanagii de casali suo Bethduras, quam Georgius de Betheri predicte comitisse fecit pro ducentis quinquaginta bisantiis. Hoc autem in curia et presentia domini mei Balduini, regis Jherosolimitani Latinorum sexti, et in presentia domine Sibille, comitisse Joppe et Ascalone, factum et compositum fuit, astantibus his tes­tibus: principe Reginaldo; Joscelino de Semmossach, Ascalone castellano; Willelmo de Mont Gorneit; Rohardo de S. Abraham; Balduino de Semmossach; Baldui­no de Jherusalem; Reginaldo le Flamenq, de Ybelin. Factum est anno ab incarna­tione Domini m c lxx vii, indictione decima.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Baldwin, lord of Ramleh, confirms the sale of the secretarial function at Bayt Daras to the countess.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Delaville Le Roulx, J., <i>Cartulaire General de l’Ordre des Hospitaliers de S. Jean de Jerusalem 1100-1310</i> (Paris:&nbsp; Leroux, 1894). (#517).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1177