---
letter_id: "25249"
title: "A letter from Isabella"
ititle: "a letter from isabella"
ltr_date: "1193"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-07-10"
modified: "2021-12-09"
url: "/letter/25249.html"
senders:
  - id: 25247
    name: Henry of Champagne, king of Jerusalem
    iname: henry of champagne, king of jerusalem
    type: people
  - id: 25246
    name: Isabella of Jerusalem
    iname: isabella of jerusalem
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the father and son and holy spirit.&nbsp; Amen.&nbsp; Let it be known to all present and future that I, Henry count palatine of Troyes, with the consent and will of lady Isabella, my wife, daughter of the illustrious former king Almaric,1 for the salvation of my soul and of my ancestors give and grant in free and perpetual alms to you Henry, prior of the hospital of Teutons in Acre and to all the brothers serving God there and all who will serve and to the sick of that hospital, a certain village situated in the territory of Acre, which is called Cafresi, with all its rights and all its appurtenances.&nbsp; I also give you in alms a certain arch in Acre situated near the gate which is called the gate of St. Nicholas, which arch is continuous with the walls of the city of Acre.&nbsp; That the gift and granting of my alms to you, said prior of the hospital of Teutons in Acre and all its brothers and the sick may remain in force and stable for eternity, I have ordered the present charter to be protected and strengthened by my seal and the subscribed witnesses.&nbsp; Witnesses of this thing are Balian of Ibelin; Reynald of Sidon; Hugo of Tiberias; Raymond of Scandelion [Iskandar]; Baldwin of Bethany; Nicholas of Mally; Milo Brebanz; Bernard of Templo, viscount of Acre; Silet, consul of the Pisans at Acre; Simon, Pisan; Raymold Antelme; Guido Antelme.&nbsp; Enacted in the 1193rd year of the lord’s incarnation in the month of February.&nbsp; Give at Acre by the hand of lord Joscius, archbishop of Tyre and royal chancellor.&nbsp; Note of Ralph.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine patris et filii et spiritus sancti. Amen. Notum sit omnibus presentibus et futuris, quod ego Henricus Trecensis comes palatinus assensu et voluntate domine Ysabelle, uxoris mee, illustris quondam regis Almirici filie, pro salute anime mee et antecessorum meorum dono et in liberam et perpetuam elemosinam concedo tibi Henrico, hospitalis Alemannorum in Accon priori, et omnibus fratribus ibidem deo servientibus et servituris et universis eiusdem hospitalis infirmis quoddam casale in territorio Acconensi situm, quod vocatur Cafresi, cum omni iure suo et cum universis pertinenciis suis. Dono quoque vobis in elemosinam quandam vautam in Ackon iuxta portam, que dicitur porta sancti Nicolai, sitam, que videlicet vauta est continua muris civitatis Acconensis. Ut autem huius mee elemosine donatio et concessio vobis, predicto priori hospitalis Alemannorum in Accon et universis eiusdem fratribus atque infirmis rata in eternum et stabilis permaneat, presentem cartam sigillo meo et testibus subscriptis precepi muniri et roborari. Huius rei testes sunt Balianus de Ybelino; Raginaldus Sydonis; Hugo Tyberiadis; Raymundus de Scandelion; Balduinus de Bethan; Nicolaus de Malli; Milo Breibanz; Bernardus de Templo, Acconensis vicecomes; Silet, consul Pisanorum Accon; Symon Pisanus; Raymuldus Antelme; Wido Antelme. Actum anno dominice incarnationis m° c° xc° iii° mense februario. Datum Accon per manum domini Ioscii Tyrensis archiepiscopi regnique cancellarii. Nota Radulfi.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>With the consent of his wife, Henry gives the hospital of the Teutons of Acre a village, Cafresi, in the territory of Acre and an arch in that city near the gate of St. Nicholas.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>1 The adjective <em>illustris</em> could apply either to father or daughter, who is sometimes described similarly, but probably applies to the dead father here.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Tabulae Ordinis Theutonici:&nbsp; Ex tabularii Regii Berolinensis Codice Potissimum</i>, ed. Ernestus Strehlke (Berlin:&nbsp; Weidman, 1869), 25, #29.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1193