---
letter_id: "25276"
title: "A Letter from Cecilia"
ititle: "a letter from cecilia"
ltr_date: "1139"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-08-28"
modified: "2021-11-24"
url: "/letter/25276.html"
senders:
  - id: 25275
    name: Cecilia of France
    iname: cecilia of france
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Pressed by the misery of the human condition and by the mass of custom as if always prone by another law of nature to sin, placed in such vacillations of attacks, we held it quite necessary to take refuge with the servants of God who join more intimately with assiduous and happy union the suffrage of benefices and prayers so that what we do not trust for ourselves, at least by their merits we may deserve to obtain from God; which is then properly accomplished when we supply their lack out of our abundance; expending our carnal things, though small, on them by mutual service of charity we receive from them what is better, that is spiritual things.&nbsp; Therefore I, countess Cecilia for the salvation of the soul of my lord, count Pons, and for the salvation of my soul and that of my son, count Raymond, with that same son assenting, and having asked [it] also from Fulk king of Jerusalem and queen Melissende, I granted in perpetual alms to the hand of Vulgrin, prior of Mount Peregrin, canon of the Holy Sepulchre, that whoever might wish to cook in the oven which the canons of said Holy Sepulchre have at Mount Peregrin, may cook freely and without any charge.</p><p>We made this grant, I and my son, count Raymond, in the 1139th year from the incarnation of the Lord, witnessed by:&nbsp; Gerald, bishop of Tripoli.&nbsp; Peter of Podio Laurentii. Peter Raymond of la Balma.&nbsp; Joscelin of Chaumont.&nbsp; Silvio Roberto.&nbsp; Peter of Podio, prior of the Hosptal.&nbsp; Master Alberic, prior of Bethlehem.&nbsp;&nbsp; William Apieres, magistrate of Mount Peregrin.&nbsp; And Homudeu.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Humane conditionis miseria pressi ac mole consuetudinis quasi altera lege nature ad peccandum semper proni, in tantis proturbationum fluctuationibus positi, necessarium valde duximus et utile ad servorum Dei, qui ei familiarius assidua et felici iunguntur copula, beneficiorum et orationum suffragia confugere, ut, quod per nostra non confidimus, saltem per eorum merita apud Deum obtinere mereamur; quod tunc rite perficitur, cum ex habundanti nostro illorum supplemus inopiam; mutuo caritatis munere carnalia nostra eis impendentes, licet parva, que meliora sunt, id est spiritualia, ab ipsis recipimus. Idcirco ego Cecilia comitissa pro salute anime domini mei, Poncii comitis, et pro salute anime mee et filii mei, Raimundi comitis, ipso filio meo assentiente, rogata etiam a rege Iherosolimorum Fulcone et a regina Milissende, concessi in perpetuam elemosinam in manu VVlgrini, prioris Montis Peregrini, canonici Sancti Sepulcri, ut qui­cumque voluerint coquere in furno, quem habent canonici prefati Sancti Sepulcri apud Montem Peregrinum, libere et sine omni calumpnia coquant.</p><p>Hanc concessionem fecimus ego et filius meus, comes Raimun­dus, anno ab incarnatione Domini mcxxxix, teste :&nbsp; Giraldo, episcopo Tripolitano. Petro de Podio Laurentii. Petro Raimundo de la Balma. Iocelino de Calmont. Silvio Roberto.&nbsp; Petro de Podio, priore de Hospitali. Magistro Alberico, priore de Bethleem. Willelmo Apieres, placeario Montis Peregrini. Et Homudeu.[B Homodei]</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The countess grants the privilege of cooking in the oven at Mount Peregrin to the canons of the Holy Sepulchre.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Cartulaire de l’eglise du Saint Sepulcre de Jerusalem</i> (Eugene de Roziere (Paris, 1849), 183-84, #92.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1139