---
letter_id: "25297"
title: "A letter from Adam Marsh"
ititle: "a letter from adam marsh"
ltr_date: "1252"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-11-20"
modified: "2021-11-28"
url: "/letter/25297.html"
senders:
  - id: 21199
    name: Adam Marsh
    iname: adam marsh
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25295
    name: Eleanor of England
    iname: eleanor of england
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To the illustrious lady A., countess of Leicester, Brother Adam [sends] greetings in the Lord.</p><p>The blessed glory of the Lord which did not spurn your devotion and was mindful of your prayer from its place, granting you both freedom from very troubling dangers and the exultation of very pleasing progeny.&nbsp; What then?&nbsp; In so far as he would be worthy to be consulted, that we continually give back to heavenly clemency praise of the divine name and praiseworthy participation in a more perfect life, progressing with most eager heart from day to day.</p><p>May your serenity be well.&nbsp; May the children be well.&nbsp; May your friends be well.&nbsp; May your ministers in Christ and the blessed Virgin always be well.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Illustri dominae A., Comitissae Leycestriae, Frater Ada salutem in Domino.</p><p>Benedicta gloria Domini de loco suo quae et vestram non spernit devotionem et orationem respexit, concedens vobis, et a periculis anxioribus liberationem, et exultationem de prole gratiori. Quid ergo ? Hoc super omnia dumtaxat consultum fore dignoscitur, ut et juge divini Nominis praeconium et laudabilem emendatioris vitae consortium profectum intentissimo corde de die in diem coelesti clementiae rependamus.</p><p>Valeat vestra serenitas. Valeant et liberi. Valeant et amici. Valeant et ministri vestri in Christo semper et beatissima Virgine.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This letter was probably sent after the birth of Eleanor's one surviving daughter, Eleanor, around Michaelmas, 1252 (see Green, <em>Lives of Princesses</em>).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Adae de Marisco Epistolae</i>, ed. J. S. Brewer (London:&nbsp; Longman, 1858), Monumenta Franciscana, 2.293, ep.158.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1252