---
letter_id: "25296"
title: "A letter from Adam Marsh"
ititle: "a letter from adam marsh"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-11-20"
modified: "2021-11-28"
url: "/letter/25296.html"
senders:
  - id: 21199
    name: Adam Marsh
    iname: adam marsh
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25295
    name: Eleanor of England
    iname: eleanor of england
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To the illustrious countess, lady A, countess of Leicester, Brother Adam [sends] greetings.</p><p>I humbly ask the most benign diligence of your serenity to accept the delay in the arrival at the honorable presence of your excellency of brother Gregory of Bosell, whom the venerable father minister of the Friars Minor of England, by his grace, allowed to travel to you in Gascony without expense of delay; for it was arranged by your faithful in the Lord that the said brother remain at this time with the lord of Canterbury for great affairs of beneficial causes.&nbsp; For which, since until present things are completed I have no leisure to expound in a lengthy letter, I pray this, I admonish this, I wish this that those things which the insufficiency of my meagerness sufficed to you as much in Christ, with most benevolent voice and letter of the most pious serenity of your remembrance took care to engrave frequently you strive with salutary effect of benign attempt to fulfil according to God.&nbsp; It would be desirable to me in all things if it suited your pleasure, through the next messenger sent by you into England, to have assurance by letter of your wished for condition, and that of the lord count and your home and others partaking of your dominion.&nbsp;</p><p>May the exceeding generosity of your sublimity be well in Christ, etc.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Inclytae comitissae dominae A., comitissae Leycestriae, Frater Ada salutem.</p><p>Benignissimam vestrae serenitatis industriam rogo suppliciter, ut acceptare velitis dilationem adventus fratris Gregorii de Bosell ad honorabilem excellentiae vestrae praesentiam, quem pater venerabilis ministerfratrum minorum Angliae licenciavit sui gratia, ut sine morae dispendio ad vos in Vasconiam proficisceretur; ordinatum est enim per devotos vestros in Domino ut memoratus frater moretur ad tempus cum domino Cantuariae propter maxima salutarium causarum negotia. Ad haec, quoniam cum praesentia conficerentur mihi non vacavit in prolixum epistolam protrahere, hoc exoro, hoc moneo, hoc adopto, ut ea quae modicitatis meae insufficientia, vobis quantum sufficit in Christo benevolentissima et voce et littera piissimae serenitatis vestrae recordationis curavit frequenter imprimere, salutari benigni conatus effectu satagatis secundum Deum adimplere. Desiderabile mihi foret per omnia, si vestro sederet beneplacito, per proximum nuntium a vobis mittendum in Angliam super optabili status vestri, et domini comitis, et domus vestrae, et aliorum vestram dominationem contingentium, litteratorie certificari.</p><p>Valeat eximia sublimitatis vestrae generositas in Christo, etc.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Adam’s language is so flowery as to be difficult to unravel, but he is excusing the delay in sending to her in Gascony a friar who had been assigned to her, encouraging her in proper behavior and asking for news of an imminent birth.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Adae de Marisco Epistolae</em>, ed. J. S. Brewer (London:&nbsp; Longman, 1858), Monumenta Franciscana, 2.292-3, ep.157.</p>