---
letter_id: "25303"
title: "A letter from Adam Marsh"
ititle: "a letter from adam marsh"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-11-20"
modified: "2021-11-28"
url: "/letter/25303.html"
senders:
  - id: 21199
    name: Adam Marsh
    iname: adam marsh
    type: people
    url: /people/21199.html
receivers:
  - id: 25295
    name: Eleanor of England
    iname: eleanor of england
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25295.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To the most excellent lady A, countess of Leicester, brother Adam [sends] greetings in the Lord.</p><p>Although not as much as I wish, yet with as much as I can in actions of gratitude, the meagerness of my devotion mounts up to the benign lordship of your serenity, because, as through the benign letter of your worthiness recently made known to me, among so many problems of various matters, you show assiduous sollicitude for my state.&nbsp; Nothing else is proof more deliberately to the pious breast of your nobility than that how much the merciful Divinity deigned to infuse your vows with more ready grace, so much the fear of the divine Name may thrive more humbly, and love live more sublimely in devotion of the hearts which do not put off repaying worthy gratitude for heavenly illuminations.&nbsp; May you take care to the greatest extent against the plots of the malignant, I beg, with the patronage of God, the protection of the angels, the help of the saints, to commend by placid prayers of pious conversation with salvific duration, what bears on the affairs of your lord and yourself in the various parts of so many necessities.&nbsp;&nbsp; When present things are finished, time will not be lacking to write at greater length.</p><p>May the safety of your serenity be well in Christ.&nbsp; May the lord of Lincoln be well.&nbsp; May your outstanding children be well.&nbsp; I am well and I in whatever way am yours.&nbsp; God blessed in all things.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Excellentissimae dominae A., Comitissae Leycestriae, Frater Ada salutem in Domino.</p><p>Etsi non quantis volo, cum quantis tamen valeo gratiarum actionibus, benignae serenitatis vestrae dominationi assurgit meae devotionis exilitas, pro eo quod, sicut per benignam dignitatis vestrae litteram mihi nuper innotuit, inter tanta variarum occupationum molestamina status mei sedulam geritis sollicitudinem. Caeterum nihil nobilitatis vestrae pio pectori consultius fore comprobatur, quam ut quanto clemens Divinitas gratia propensiori votis aspirare dignatur, tanto divini Nominis et timor humilius vigeat, et vivat sublimimius amor in devotione cordium, quae dignam coelicis illuminationibus gratitudinem rependere non postponunt. Contra malignantium insidias summopere curetis, obsecro, Dei patrocinio, Angelorum presidio, Sanctorum adjutorio, placidis piae conversationis precibus cum jugitate salvifica commendare, quae domini vestri et vestri ipsius in tantarum necessitatum articulis negotia contingunt. Cum praesentia conficerentur, prolixius scribere non vacavit.</p><p>Valeat vestrae serenitatis incolumitas in Christo. Valet dominus Lincolniae. Valent et insignes liberi vestri. Valeo et ego qualiscunque vester. Benedictus Deus per omnia.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Adam is grateful for her concern and enourages her in a difficult time.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Adae de Marisco Epistolae</i>, ed. J. S. Brewer (London:&nbsp; Longman, 1858), Monumenta Franciscana,&nbsp;2.300-01, ep.164.</p>