---
letter_id: "25306"
title: "A letter from Lothar"
ititle: "a letter from lothar"
ltr_date: "947, June 27"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-11-28"
modified: "2021-03-24"
url: "/letter/25306.html"
senders:
  - id: 25305
    name: Lothar, king of Italy
    iname: lothar, king of italy
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 19
    name: Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress
    iname: adelaide of burgundy, ottonian empress
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the eternal god, Lothar, by divine consideration and the mercy of God, King.&nbsp; The sagacity of all the faithful of the holy Church and of ours present and future will know.&nbsp; How by the intervention and petition of the lord Manasses, our beloved faithful Archbishop, through this page of our precept as far as we can justly and legally, we grant to queen Adelaide, our beloved spouse a certain land of our jurisdiction in the town of Coriano in a place which is called Adgrane.&nbsp; It is, by just measure, thirty-one acres (<i>iuges)</i> to which joins a land of a certain Savinioni on the east and Pecusiolo(1) on the west and in another place where it is called Cantone another piece of land by measure eight joined poles (a linear measure, perticas iugales) and 6 planks (tabulas) and indeed a third piece near there of 30 planks and near that a fourth piece which is 5 joined poles and a fifth piece in Rivasioli which is two acres and 15 joined poles, we transfer with set boundaries and accessions separating from our jurisdiction and rule into the jurisdiction and rule of the said queen Adelaide our beloved spouse and order that she have and hold them and firmly possess and have the power of giving, selling, exchanging, alienating and whatever her reason decrees doing, without any opposition from me or my successors or any man.&nbsp; If indeed someone should in the future, which I do not believe, attempt to weaken the order of this our gift, let him know he would be ordered [to pay] a hundred pounds of the best gold half to our Chamber and half to the heirs of said queen Adelaide our most sweet spouse.&nbsp; So that this be believed and diligently observed by all, we have ordered it to be signed by the impression of our ring below, strengthening it with our own hand.</p><p>The sign [monogram] of lord Lothar, most serene king.&nbsp; I, Adelric, chancellor, in the place of bishop and archchancellor Bruning, recognized/confirmed it and wrote under (with seal).</p><p>Given on the fifth ides/kalends of July in the 947th year of the lord’s incarnation, fifth indiction of lord Lothar, xvi.&nbsp; Enacted happily at Pavia, amen. &nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine dei aeterni Lotharius divino respectu et Dei misericordia Rex.&nbsp; Omnium sanctae Ecclesiae fidelium nostrorumque presentium ac futurorum nouerit sagacitas.&nbsp; Qualiter interuentu ac peticione domni Manasses Archiepiscopi nostrique dilecti fidelis per huius nostri precepti paginam prout iuste et legaliter possumus concedimus reginae Adeleidae nostraeque amabili coniugi quandam terram iuris nostri in uilla coriano in loco qui dicitur adgrane Et est per mensura iusta iuges treginta et una cui coheret a mane terra cuiusdam sauinioni a sera pecusiolo atque in alio loco ubi dicitur Cantone aliam petiam de terra et est per mensuram perticas iugales octo et tabulas vi terciam uero petiam ibi prope et est tabulas xxx item uero ibi prope quartam peciam que est perticas iugales v quintam uero petiam in riuasioli que est iuges duas et perticas iugales vx. cum finibus terminibus et accessionibus earum a nostro iure et dominio sequestrantes in eiusdem pretaxatae adelaidae reginae dilectaeque coniugi nostrae ius et dominium transfundimus atque delegamus ut habeat teneat firmiterque possideat abeatque potestatem donandi uendendi comutandi alienandi et quidquid eius decreuerit animus faciendi omni mea meorumque successorum siue omnium hominum contradictione omnino remota. si quis uero quod futurum esse non credo huius nostrae donationis preceptum infirmare atemptauerit sciat se compositurum auri optimi libras centum medietatem Kamerae nostrae et medietatem prefactae adelaidae reginae nostrae dulcissimae coniugi suis heredibus. Quod ut uerius credatur diligencius ab omnibus obseruetur manu propria roborantes anuli nostri impressione subter insigniri iussimus.</p><p>Signum domni lotharii (<i> monogramma</i> ) serenissimi regis.</p><p>Adelricus kancellarius ad uicem Bruningi Episcopi et Archicancellarii recognoui et subscripsi.</p><p><i>( sigillo ).</i></p><p>Data quinto idus kalendas(2) iulius anno dominicae incarnationis dccccxlvii. domni uero lotharii xvi. indiccione quinta. Actum papiae feliciter amen.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The king, Adelaide's first husband, grants his wife a piece of land in Coriano, at the suggestion of the archbishop. &nbsp;<em>Perticas</em> and <em>tabulas</em> are units of agrarian &nbsp;measurement.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>1. &nbsp;I take these to be names of places rather than uses of land, i.e. savin (a &nbsp;medicinal shrub) and sheep.</p><p>2. &nbsp;The editor suggests that kalendas was a correction of idus, which was not removed.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Historia Patriae Monumenta</em> edita iussu Regis Caroli Alberti, (Augustae taurinorum e regio typographeo, MDCCCXXXVI), Chartarum, 1.159-60, #97.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>947, June 27