---
letter_id: "25302"
title: "A letter from Adam Marsh"
ititle: "a letter from adam marsh"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-11-20"
modified: "2014-11-20"
url: "/letter/25302.html"
senders:
  - id: 21199
    name: Adam Marsh
    iname: adam marsh
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25295
    name: Eleanor of England
    iname: eleanor of england
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To the illustrious countess of Leicester, brother Adam [sends] greetings and after the secure peace of time, the glory of eternity.</p><p>I give devoted thanks to your lordship as much as I am able that you so diligently wrote to my humbleness&nbsp; about the magnificent events granted to the lord count and to you through the mercy of God and did not omit to make known to a soul desiring it&nbsp; the state of said count and your own and your children’s .&nbsp; May there be the blessing for supernal dispensation in all things which, if the pusillanimity of diffidence should obstruct, knows without doubt that under divine patronage, in the protection of the angels, with the help of the saints, will overcomewith triumphal celebration all difficulties of advantages in the hands of the said count, whether enemies rage, or betrayers conspire, or detractors condemn, or the perverse go mad.&nbsp; May the vain cowardice of false fear be far from the serene excellence of the [your]royal heart.&nbsp; Could human suspicion hesitate where divine regard took care to accomplish the expectation of future things from the exhibition of past?&nbsp; May you therefore have infallible certitude in the Author of salvation that he will fulfil those things that were begun salubriously with salutary reason, for the glory of his Name and consolation of those faithfully hoping in him.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>lllustri Comitissae Leycestriae Frater Ada salutem, et post securam pacem temporis, gloriam aeternitatis.</p><p>Grates refero dominationi vestrae quantum valeo devotas, pro eo quod meam modicitatem super magnificis eventibus domino comiti et vobis per Dei clementiam concessis, in litteris tam diligenter conscriptis, statum quoque memorati comitis et vestri liberorumque vestrorum desideranti animo innotescere non omisistis. Sit benedictio supernae dispensationi per omnia, quae si obstiterit diffidentiae pusillanimitas indubitanter novit quod sub Divino patrocinio, in Angelorum praesidio, cum Sanctorum adjutorio, cunctas salutarium difficultates in manibus memorati comitis, sive saeviant hostes, sive proditores moliantur, sive obloquantur detractores, sive perversores insaniant, triumphali celebritate consummabit. Absit a serena regii cordis excellentia vana ficti timoris ignavia. Numquid haesitare poterit humana suspicio ubi dignatio Divina ex praeteritorum exhibitione expectationem futurorum consummare curavit? Sit ergo vobis in Auctore salutis certitudo infallibilis, quod ea quae ratione salutari sunt inchoata salubriter adimplebit, propter Nominis sui gloriam et de se fideliter sperantium consolationem.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Adam writes congratulations for success and encouragement in the face of future dangers.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Adae de Marisco Epistolae</i>, ed. J. S. Brewer (London:&nbsp; Longman, 1858), Monumenta Franciscana,&nbsp;2.299-300, ep.163.</p>