---
letter_id: "25315"
title: "A letter from Rudolph"
ititle: "a letter from rudolph"
ltr_date: "1014, February 22"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-12-08"
modified: "2014-12-08"
url: "/letter/25315.html"
senders:
  - id: 25312
    name: Rudolph, king of Burgundy
    iname: rudolph, king of burgundy
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25311
    name: Ermengarde of Savoy
    iname: ermengarde of savoy
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Rudolph king of Burgundy, at the request of Burchard archbishop and Anselm bishop, gives queen Ermengarde certain courts in the county of Savoy, namely greater Albigny with the church of St. Peter, the other Albigny with the church of St. John, Miolans, Conflans with the church of St. Mary, and Neuchatel with all its appurtenances, servants and handmaids.&nbsp; S. of Rudolph, king.&nbsp; Paldolf, chancellor reviewed it.&nbsp; 1014, February 22.&nbsp; Enacted at Loges.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Rodulphus rex Burgundiae, petentibus Burchardo archiepiscopo et Anselmo episcopo, donat Irmengardae reginae quasdam Cortes in comitatu Savogiensi, videlicet Albiniacum majorem cum ecclesia S. Petri, alium Albiniacum cum ecclesia S. Joannis, Mejolanum, Conflenz cum ecclesia S. Mariae, et novum castellum cum omnibus appendiciis, servis et ancillis. — S. Rodulfi regis. Paldolfus cancellarius recognovit. 1014, 22 Februarii.&nbsp; Actum Logis de Castello.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The summary of a charter in which Rudolph gives Ermengarde certain places in Savoy.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Translation notes:</h2><p>Chart. Eccl. Cath. Viennensis transcripsit P. De Rivaz.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Regesta Comitum Sabaudiae</i>, ed. Dominico Carutti (Turin:&nbsp; Fratres Bocca, 1889),&nbsp;12-13, #37.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1014, February 22