---
letter_id: "25313"
title: "A letter from Rudolph"
ititle: "a letter from rudolph"
ltr_date: "1011, April 2 "
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-12-08"
modified: "2014-12-13"
url: "/letter/25313.html"
senders:
  - id: 25312
    name: Rudolph, king of Burgundy
    iname: rudolph, king of burgundy
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25311
    name: Ermengarde of Savoy
    iname: ermengarde of savoy
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the holy and individual trinity, Rudolph, by divine mercy king.&nbsp; Let it be known to all alive now and yet to be born how I, drawn by spousal love and counseled by the advice of primates of my kingdom, give to my most beloved spouse Ermengarde the city of metropolitan Vienne with the castle of Pupet (Papette) &nbsp;and the county of Vienne with its alods and servants which I am known to have in it; and I give her the county of Sermorens with its alods and servants.&nbsp; Let her have all these named above and possess them with the free power of holding, giving, selling, exchanging, or whatever it should please her to do with them.&nbsp; And so that these things done by us are believed and not violated by our successors, we have strengthened this with our hand and ordered it to be signed with our seal.&nbsp; Sign of the most pious lord Rudolph (monogram) L.S. with this to be read around it.&nbsp; Rudolph most pious king.&nbsp; I, chancellor Paldolf, inspected it.&nbsp; Dated 8th kalends of May, Monday, &nbsp;xvii, 1011th year from the incarnation of the lord, in the 18th year of the reign of lord king Rudolph.&nbsp; Enacted at Aix.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine sancte et indiuidue trinitatis Rodulphus diuiua clementia rex. notum sit omnibus natis et nascituris qualiter ego iugali amore attractus primatumque regni mei concilio ammonitus dono dilectissimæ sponsae meæ lrmingardi viennam metropolinae (sic) ciuitatem cum pupet (sic) castello et commitatum viennensem cum alodis et mancipiis quæ in ipso habere videor; et dono ei comitatum Salmorenemsem cum alodis et mancipiis . hæc omnia quæ supra nominata sunt habeat et possideat sub libera potestate habendi donandi vendendi commutandi vel quicquid illi placuerit inde faciendi. et ut hæc a nobis facta credantur et a posteris nostris non infringantur manu nostra roborauimus et sigillo nostro insigniri iussimus signum domni Rodulphi piissimi (monogramma) L. S. cum hac legenda circumcirca . Rodulphus&nbsp; piissimus rex. Paldolfus cancellarius recognoui.Data viii KaL maias luna xvii. anno ab incarnatione domini mxi regnante domno Rodulpho rege. anno xviiiI. actum Aquis.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The king gives his wife Vienne and Sermorens, which constituted part of her dower.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Manuscript source:</h2><p>Archives of the archbishopric of Vienne.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>L. Cibrario,&nbsp; <i>Documenti, sigilli e monete appartenenti alla storia della monarchia di Savoia</i> … (Torino:&nbsp; Stamperia Reale, 1833), 15-16. &nbsp;Summarized in&nbsp;<i>Regesta Comitum Sabaudiae</i>, ed. Dominico Carutti (Turin:&nbsp; Fratres Bocca, 1889),&nbsp;11, #32.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1011, April 2 