---
letter_id: "25324"
title: "A letter from Ermengarde"
ititle: "a letter from ermengarde"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-12-09"
modified: "2014-12-09"
url: "/letter/25324.html"
senders:
  - id: 25311
    name: Ermengarde of Savoy
    iname: ermengarde of savoy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of Christ, I, Ermengarde queen give to the monastery of St. Andrew and to abbot Ither and the monks of said monastery the house of Ermenbert and my holdings which are between Albigny and St. John, and one meadow which I held in my hand, for the remedy of my soul, that they may have the power of selling, giving, and holding or exchanging.&nbsp; Sign of queen Ermengarde.&nbsp; Sign of Richard. Sign of Walcher. Sign of Ubold. Sign of another Walcher.&nbsp; This charter was made in the presence of lord Leodegar archbishop and all his canons.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Christi nomine, ego Ermengardis regina dono monasterio Sancti Andree &amp; abbati Yterio &amp; monachis predicti monasterii mansum Hermenberti &amp; meas condaminas que sunt inter Albiniacum &amp; Sanctum Johannem, &amp; unum pratum quod ego in manu mea tenebam, pro remedio anime mee, ut habeant potestatem vendendi, dandi &amp; tenendi seu commutandi.&nbsp; Signum Ermengardi regine.&nbsp; Signum Richardi.&nbsp; Signum Walcherii. Signum Uboldi. Signum Walcherii alteri.&nbsp; Hec carta facta est sub presentia domni Leudegarii archiepiscopi &amp; omnium canonichorum ejus.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen gives the monastery of St. Andrew a house and a meadow.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Chartularium monasterii St. Andreae inferior Viennae Ordinis Sancti Benedicti,</em> ed. C.U.J. Chevalier (Lyon:&nbsp; N. Savigné, 1869), 185-86, #242. &nbsp;Summarized in&nbsp;<i>Regesta Comitum Sabaudiae</i>, ed. Dominico Carutti (Turin:&nbsp; Fratres Bocca, 1889), 33, #94.</p>