---
letter_id: "25333"
title: "A letter from Adelgida"
ititle: "a letter from adelgida"
ltr_date: "1030, October"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-01-07"
modified: "2021-03-26"
url: "/letter/25333.html"
senders:
  - id: 25331
    name: Adelgida/Adela
    iname: adelgida/adela
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25331.html
  - id: 25332
    name: Amadeus I, count of Savoy 
    iname: amadeus i, count of savoy 
    type: people
    url: /people/25332.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of our lord Jesus Christ, during the 26th year of the reign of Rudolph, in the 1030th year of the lord’s incarnation, 11th kalends of November, twentieth moon ... v.&nbsp; I Amadeus, son of count Humbert, and Adelgida/Adela, my wife, ordered this charter of donation to be made of the church of St. Maurice, situated in the county which is called Maltacena/Matassine* and all the lands which we gave in the present and shall give in the future for the honor of the lord God and the church of saints Peter and Paul of the monastery of Cluny, over which the lord father Odilo is known to preside, for the redemption and salvation of our souls, with the permission and confirmation of lord Malleno, bishop of the church of Grenoble, and Humbert, bishop and all the canon of that city, we give to the lord God everything which is noted above and to his blessed apostles Peter and Paul of the monastery of Cluny and to all the monks dwelling there, that we may be able to share in their prayers, while reserving to ourselves that right which is called the right of advowson and the right of presentation for ourselves and our children and their successors while it is our will since divine piety orders us to acquire eternal reward from the bestowing of temporal things.&nbsp; Since we faithfully dispense those things to confer the reward of benediction on us.&nbsp; For there is a sweetness to us in the gospel precept that is to be imitated not only by us but by all who truly believe:&nbsp; Treasure for yourself treasures in heaven where neither worm nor rust destroys [Matth 6:20].&nbsp; Therefore we grant this charter of donation by legitimate authority of bequest of said place to the inhabitants, without contest, so that from the remitter of all crimes we may receive the mercy of sinners.&nbsp; If anyone might wish to disturb this donation let him pay a hundred pounds of gold in the king’s hall and moreover [incur] the curse of the bishop of Grenoble, since in his bishopric with him approving, it was enacted and firmly confirmed and approved with every stipulation supported and strengthened by their seal.&nbsp; Sign + of Obert [Humbert], count.&nbsp; Sign + of Ancilia his wife.&nbsp; Sign + of Amedeus, count.&nbsp; Sign + of Adela his wife.&nbsp; These men&nbsp; and these women made this donation and ordered this charter to be made and confirmed it, present in the court of the king.&nbsp; Sign of Rudolph, king.&nbsp; Sign of queen Ermengarde.&nbsp; Sign + of Odo.&nbsp; Sign + of Antelm.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine domini nostri ihu xpi. Regnante Rodulpho anno xxxvi . incarnationis dominice anno millesimo xxx. xi kalendas nouembris. luna uigesima ... v. Ego amedeus filius uberti comitis. et adaelgida. uxor, mea hanc. cartam donationis. &nbsp;fieri iussimus de ecclesia sancti mauricii que est&nbsp; sita in pago qui uocatur maltacena et de omnibus terris quas in presenti damus et in futuro daturi sumus ad honorem domini dei et ecclesie sanctorum petri et pauli. cluniensis. monasterii. cui preesse uidetur domnus pater odilo pro redempcione et salutem. animarum. nostrarum. permictente&nbsp; et confirmante domino Malleno. episcopo. gracianopolitano ecclesie . seu umberto. episcopo et omnibus canonicis eiusdem ciuitatis damus domino deo omne quod supra memoratum est. et beatis apostolis eius petro et paulo. cluniensis . monasterii. et omnibus, monachis. ibidem morantibus. ut oracioniun. earum participes esse possimus nobis reseruando. illud ius que uocatur ius patronatus&nbsp; atque ius presentandi pro nobis et natis nostris et eorum successoribus dum nostre fuerit uoluntatis quia diuina pietas precipit nobis de largitione temporalium rerum premium adquirere sempiternum. Quia fideliter fidelibus ea dispensamus benedictionis nobis confere munus. Est nobis namque mellifluum insuper euangelicum preceptum quod non solum nobis, sed omnibus uere credentibus est imitandum. Tesaurizate. uobis tesauros. in celo . ubi nec tinea, nec ecrugo demolitur. Hanc igitur cartam donationis legitima testamenti autoritate predicti loci, habitatoribus concedimus absque ullas lite, ut apud. remissorem omnium delictorum ualeamus percipere ueniam peccatorum. si quis. hanc donacionem inquietare uoluerit in aula regis centum libras auri componat. et insuper maledictionem gracianopolis episcopi. quia in eius episcopatu se laudante est acta et firmiter roborata . atque laudata cum omni stipulatione. subnixa. sigilloque eorum corroborata. Signum + Oberti comitis. Signum + Ancilie uxoris eius. Signum + Amedei comitis. Signum +&nbsp; Adile uxoris eius. Hii et hae hanc donationem fecerunt et cartam istam fieri iusserunt. et in presenti in curia regis firmari rogauerunt.&nbsp; Signum Rodulfi regis.&nbsp; Signum reginae Ermengardis.&nbsp; Signum + Odonis.&nbsp; Signum + Antelmi.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The count and countess give a gift to the Cluniac priory of Bourget,recently founded. &nbsp;The gift is witnessed and approved by the count's father and mother, as well as the king and queen of Burgundy. &nbsp;They later gave land to St. Maurice for the grave of their son, Humbert (Previté Orton, 55-56.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>* C.W. Previté&nbsp;&nbsp;Orton (<em>The Early History of the House of Savoy, 100-1233</em> [Cambridge, 1912]) identifies Maltacena as Matassine near Le Bourget, 60. &nbsp; &nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Historiae Patriae Monumenta</i>, edita iussu Regis Caroli Alberti, Chartarum (Augustae taurinorum e regio typographeo, MDCCCXXXVI), 1.490-91, #281.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1030, October