---
letter_id: "25353"
title: "A letter from Agnes"
ititle: "a letter from agnes"
ltr_date: "1091, August 26"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-01-30"
modified: "2015-01-30"
url: "/letter/25353.html"
senders:
  - id: 25350
    name: Agnes of Savoy
    iname: agnes of savoy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25350.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the 1091st year from the incarnation of our God Jesus Christ, sixth kalends of September, indiction 14, to the monastery of the mother of God and inviolate virgin, in a place which is called Cavorre, I, Agnes, daughter of the late marquis Peter, and widow of the late Frederick, who am professed to live by Roman law, I, present, said to those present as offerer and donator to said monastery ... Thus I, Agnes above, who give and offer from the present day to said monastery of St. Mary of Cavorre one property in a place which is called Bagnolo, etc.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Anno ab incarnatione Dei nostri iesu Christi millesimo nonagesimo primo, sexto kal. septembris, indictione XIV, monasterio genitricis Dei et intemerate Virginis in loco qui Caburo vocatur sito, ego Agnes filia q[uondam] Petri marchionis et relicta olim Friderici, quae professa sum lege vivere Romana, offertrix et donatrix in predicto monasterio presens presentibus dixi ... Ideo ego qui supra Agnes a presenti die dono et offero in prefato monasterio Caburensi sancte Marie mansum unum in loco qui Bagnolo vocatur etc.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This partial transcript of the charter of donation by the countess to St. Mary of Cavorre is all that is cited by Muletti from the papers of the baron Joseph Vernazza.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Muletti <i>Memorie storiche-diplomatiche ... di Saluzzo</i>, I.282, from the papers of baron Joseph Vernazza. &nbsp;Noted by Carutti<i>, Regesta comitum Sabaudiae</i>, p.80, #221.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1091, August 26