---
letter_id: "25354"
title: "A letter from Adelaide"
ititle: "a letter from adelaide"
ltr_date: "1078, October 26"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-01-30"
modified: "2015-03-02"
url: "/letter/25354.html"
senders:
  - id: 105
    name: Adelaide of Turin and Susa
    iname: adelaide of turin and susa
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the year of the Lord 1078, 7th kalends of November, indiction 2, in Pinerolo, where Arduin is abbot, Adelaide, countess and daughter of marquis Manfred, who was professed by her birth to live according to Salic law, gives to the monastery of St. Mary her whole portion, which is half of the court of Pinerolo, with half the castle, and its fortifications, with all the houses, lands, etc., and by the knife, the knotted straw, the glove, the piece of earth and the branch of a tree, made the transfer and the investiture, and I threw myself out, and guaranteed, and made myself absent from the property of that monastery.&nbsp; The penalty of a thousand ounces of best gold, two thousand weight of silver, and Giselbert, notary of the sacred palace gave the page and Combert, bishop of Turin confirmed it.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Anno Domini M.LXXVIII.vii. Kal. Novembris, Indict. II. in loco Pinerolii, ubi Arduinus Abbas, Adelegida Comitissa, &amp; Filia Magnifredi Marchionis, quae professa est ex natione sua, lege vivere Salica.&nbsp; Dat Monasterio Sanctae Mariae integram suam portionem, quae est medietas Curiae Pinerolii, cum medietate castri, &amp; ejus munitionibus, cum omnibus domibus, terris, &amp;c. &amp; hoc per Cultellum, Festucam Nodatam, Vantonem, Vasonem terrae, atque ramum arboris, traditionem fecit, &amp; vestituram, &amp; me inde foras expuli, &amp; Vuarpini, &amp; absentem feci, ad proprietatem ipsius Monasterii.&nbsp; Poena auri optimi uncias mille, argenti ponderis duo millia, &amp; paginam G. Selberto Notario Sacri Palatii dedit, &amp; Combertus Episcopus Taurinensis confirmavit.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This seems to be the summary of a donation made by Adelaide to the monastery at Pinerolo.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Samuel Guichenon, <i>L’Histoire Généalogique de la maison royale de Savoye</i>&nbsp; v.2 Preuves, p.18.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1078, October 26