---
letter_id: "25360"
title: "A letter from Adelaide of Turin and Susa (1078, October 26)"
ititle: "a letter from adelaide of turin and susa (1078, october 26)"
ltr_date: "1073"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-02-15"
modified: "2015-02-15"
url: "/letter/25360.html"
senders:
  - id: 105
    name: Adelaide of Turin and Susa
    iname: adelaide of turin and susa
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.&nbsp; In the one-thousand &nbsp;seventythird year from the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, tenth indiction,* twelfth kalends of June, Tuesday (third feria).&nbsp; I countess Adelaide, daughter of the late count Odo, residing in the palace of Susa, give as an allod to the church of St. Lawrence with the parish (plebe) of martyrs , a piece of land in Urbiano, and the toll of the gate and the pasturage as necessary in all my power without any retention.&nbsp; This gift, as said, and whatever I give in my whole county, either<i> </i>by sale or any manner that will be given or acquired by said church, I countess Adelaide, with the consent and approval of my sons, namely Amedeus and Peter, I approve and give in allod to God and St. Lawrence of the parish of martyrs<i>&nbsp; </i>and to the canons who now live by rule in that place, namely Gerald, Nantelm, Walter and Arman, Martin, Gerner and all the others who will live there by rule after these, indeed I make this gift for the amending of my sins and for the redemption of the soul of my husband and all my relatives and all the faithful deceased.&nbsp; Whoever might, therefore, presume to violate this above donation, be damned with perennial punishment in hell with the traitor Judas.&nbsp; I John Canam, notary of the sacred palace, subscribed.&nbsp; Witnesses of this above donation, Bruno, viscount, Ismid of Susa and his brother Borell of Visternio, Bruno Clusario, and Constant Gastaldio, and Drodo of Aviliana, and many others.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine Domini nostri Jesu Christi. Anno ab incarnatione Domini nostri Iesu Christi millesimo&nbsp;septuagesimo tertio, indictione decima,* duodecimo kal. iunii, feria tertia. Ego Adalaida comitissa filia&nbsp;quondam Otonis comitis residens in palatio Secusiae braydam, que apud Urbianum ests et tholoneum portae&nbsp;et pascua, cum necesse fuerit in omni potestate mea sine omni retentione pro alodio trado ecclesiae sancti&nbsp;Laurentii de plebe martyrum. Hoc donum sicut dictum est, et quidquid in toto comitatu meo dono, vel&nbsp;venditione, seu aliquo modo supradictae ecclesiae datum vel equisitum fuerit, ego Adalaida comitissa,&nbsp;consentientibus atque laudantibus filiis meis, videlicet Amedeo et Petro laudo et in allodium dono Deo, et&nbsp;beato Laurentio de plebe martyrum et canonicis qui in eodem loco nunc regulariter vivunt, scilicet Geraldo,&nbsp;Nantelmo, Vualterio et Armanno, Martino, Garnerio et aliis omnibus post istos ibidem regulariter viventibus,&nbsp;hoc donum vero facio pro emendatione peccatorum meorum, ac pro redemptione animae mariti mei et&nbsp;omnium parentum meorum, seu omnium fidelium defunctorum. Quicumque ergo hanc supradictam&nbsp;donationem violare praesumpserit, perenni supplicio cum Iuda proditore in inferno damnetur. Ego Iohannes&nbsp;Canam notarius sacri palatii subscripsi. Huius praescriptae donationis testes Bruno Vicecomes, Ysmido&nbsp;Secusiensis et Borellus frater eius de Visternio, Bruno Clusarius, et Constantius Gastaldio, et Drodo de&nbsp;Aviliana, et plures alii.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The countess gives a piece of land as an allod to the church of St. Lawrence. &nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>* Muletti suggests this is a scribal error; the indiction should be decima prima, eleventh.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Muletti,&nbsp;<em>Memorie storico-diplomatiche appartenenti alla città ed ai marchesi di Saluzzo</em>&nbsp;(Saluzzo:&nbsp; lobetti-Bodoni, 1829), 1.234-35.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1073