---
letter_id: "25379"
title: "A letter from Aleide"
ititle: "a letter from aleide"
ltr_date: "1199, January 21"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-04-10"
modified: "2015-04-10"
url: "/letter/25379.html"
senders:
  - id: 25375
    name: Aleide/Adelaide of Cleves
    iname: aleide/adelaide of cleves
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25375.html
  - id: 25376
    name: Theoderic/Dirk VII, count of Holland
    iname: theoderic/dirk vii, count of holland
    type: people
    url: /people/25376.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext51">In the name of the individual Trinity.&nbsp; I Theoderic/Dirk count of Holland and A. my wife, countess of Holland, greetings/salvation to those in the present as well as the future, in Him who is the salvation of all.&nbsp; We make known to you that Biggo and his nephews bought land from us in Pendrecht with the tithe and office/service which the land includes in its boundaries:&nbsp; from the&nbsp; cemetery of Pendrecht it extends to the office of Katendrecht; so that said B. and his nephews and those to whom that land will have devolved as legitimate heirs may possess it freely with the tithe and the office and the election of the priest of the church and they may obtain every kind of jurisdiction of the Zeelanders; and let there not be any claim over that land unless in a [military]&nbsp; campaign.&nbsp; Truly it is permitted to no official to inhabit said land except by permission of the count and said B. and his nephews and their successors.&nbsp; We have frequently permitted said men in the aforenamed land to construct a castle or fortification and they make such dykes that because of them we do not lose our land by flooding of water.&nbsp; Witnesses of this thing are these:&nbsp; lord Hugo of Vorne, Gerard of Hurst, Walter of Ruvene, Arnold seneschal, Gerulf Calle, Syger Buth.&nbsp; Dated at Haarlem, 1199th year, in the month of January, 12th Kalends of February.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext51">In nomine individue Trinitatis. Ego Theodericus Hollandie comes, et A. uxor mea, Hollandie&nbsp; comitissa, tam presentibus&nbsp; quam futuris salutem in Eo qui est salus omnium. Notum vobis facimus, quod Biggo et nepotes sui erga nos terram infra Peydreth emerunt cum decima et officio, que terra his terminis clauditur: a cy[m]iterio Peydreth extenditur usque ad officium Catendreth;ita ut eandem terram iamdictus B.&nbsp; et nepotes eius et illi [a]d&nbsp; quoscumque eadem terra per legitimos fuerit devoluta heredes cum decima et officio et electione sacerdotis ecclesie lib[e]re possideant et ip(s)i omnem iuris tenorem Selandensium&nbsp; obtineant; ut nec ulla super ipsam terram fiat petitio nisi in expedicione. Sane nulli ministeriali liceat predictam inhabitare terram nisi de comitis licentia et prefati B. et nepotum et successorum eius. Sepe itaque dictis viris in prememorata [ter]ra&nbsp; castrum vel munitionem construere licentiavimus et tal[e]s aggeres ipsi compone(nt), quod nos per eos terram nostram inundatione aque non amittamus. Testes huius rei sunt hii: dominus Hugo de Vorne,&nbsp; Gerardus&nbsp; de Hurst, Woulterus de Ruvene, Arnoldus dapifer, Gerulfus&nbsp; Calle, SygerusButh. Datum apud Harlehem anno M째 C째 XCVIIII째, m[e]nse ianuario, XII째 kl. februarii.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The count and countess affirm a sale of land with certain rights, free of interference from officials. &nbsp;The document notes the building of fortifications and dykes to hold back the water.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p class="Bodytext51"><i>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</i>, ed. A.C.F.Koch,&nbsp;1.392-93, #233.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1199, January 21