---
letter_id: "25377"
title: "A letter from Aleide"
ititle: "a letter from aleide"
ltr_date: "1198"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-04-09"
modified: "2021-11-18"
url: "/letter/25377.html"
senders:
  - id: 25375
    name: Aleide/Adelaide of Cleves
    iname: aleide/adelaide of cleves
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25375.html
  - id: 25376
    name: Theoderic/Dirk VII, count of Holland
    iname: theoderic/dirk vii, count of holland
    type: people
    url: /people/25376.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I, Theoderic/Dirk, by the grace of God count of Holland, and I, countess Aleide, for the remedy of our souls and those of our predecessors, we confer on the church of St. Mary in the Island the fish-pond in Giesenmonde between the house of Ambrose Wildebuc and Theoderic Bukenhalls.&nbsp; That this may remain firm in perpetuity and be known to&nbsp; those in the present as well as the future, also lest any of our successors should presume to break this at any time, we held it useful and necessary to strengthen the present page with the impression of our seal.</p><p>These were enacted in the 1198th year from the incarnation of the lord.</p><p>Witnesses are these:&nbsp; Henry, deacon of the church of St. Peter, William, canon of the church of St. Martin, Arnold the seneschal, Henry his brother, William of Vorholt (?Uurholt), Martin of Dordrecht.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine Domini.</p><p>Ego Teodericus , Dei gratia comes Hollandie, et ego Aleidis comitissa pro remedio animarum nostrarum et predecessorum nostrorum piscaturam in Gescemunde inter domum&nbsp; Ambrosii Wildebuc et Teoderici Bukenhals contulimus ecclesie beate&nbsp; Marie in Insula.</p><p>Ut&nbsp; hoc autem in perpetuum ratum permaneat et tam presentibus quam futuris notum fiat, ne etiam aliquis successorum nostrorum hoc aliquando infringere presumat, utile et necessarium duximus sigilli nostri impressione presentem paginam corroborare.</p><p>Acta sunt hec anno incarnationis dominice M° C° XC° VIII0.</p><p>Testes sunt hii: Heinricus decanus ecclesie beati Petri, Wilhelmi canonicus&nbsp; ecclesie beati Martini, Arnoldus dapifer, Heinricus&nbsp; frater eius Wilhelmus de Uurholt, Martinus de Durthric.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The count and countess give a fish-pond to a church.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</i>, ed. A.C.F.Koch, 1.390, #231.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1198