---
letter_id: "25388"
title: "A letter from Aleide"
ititle: "a letter from aleide"
ltr_date: "1203, before November 5"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-04-10"
modified: "2015-04-10"
url: "/letter/25388.html"
senders:
  - id: 25375
    name: Aleide/Adelaide of Cleves
    iname: aleide/adelaide of cleves
    type: woman
  - id: 25376
    name: Theoderic/Dirk VII, count of Holland
    iname: theoderic/dirk vii, count of holland
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext61">I, Theoderic, by the grace of God count of Holland and countess Aleide of Holland, greetings in Christ to all who will see the present page.</p><p class="Bodytext61">We make known that for the salvation of our souls, consulting providently, we have granted to the church of St. Mary in the Island, a minor tithe at Heimond, with the consent of our men and officials, to be freely possessed perpetually.&nbsp;</p><p class="Bodytext61">That this form of our arrangement may remain firm and untroubled, we have strengthened it with the impression of our seal and the subscription of witnesses.&nbsp; Witness indeed are these:&nbsp; Otto count of Bentheim, Hugo of Voorne, Simon of Haarlem, Walter Spirinc, John of Heusden, Arnold of Riswick, Th. seneschal, and several others.&nbsp;</p><p class="Bodytext61">Enacted in the year of the lord, 1203; dated at Dordrecht by the hand of chaplain Henry.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Ego Th., Dei gratia Hollandie comes, et Aleidis Hollandie comitissa universis presentem paginam inspecturis salutem in Christo.</p><p>Notum facimus quod nos animarum nostrarum saluti provide consulentes ecclesie beate Marie in Insula minutam decimam super Hoymonth de consensu hominum et ministerialium nostrorum perpetuo possidendam libere concessimus.</p><p>Ut autem huius constitutionis nostre forma rata et inconvulsa permaneat, nostri impressione sigilli et testium subscriptione corroboravimus. Testes vero hii sunt: Otto comes de Bentheim, Hugo de Vorne, Symon de Harlem, Walterus Spirinc, Jo. de Husden, Arnoldus de Riswick, Th. dapifer, et ceteri quamplures.</p><p class="Bodytext61">Actum anno Domini M CC III; datum apud Dhurdreght per manus Henrici capellani.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The count and countess grant a tithe to a church. &nbsp;The editor dates the letter before November 5, since the count died November , 1203.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p class="Bodytext61"><i>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</i>, ed. A.C.F.Koch,&nbsp;1.436, #262.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1203, before November 5