---
letter_id: "25403"
title: "A letter from Mathilde"
ititle: "a letter from mathilde"
ltr_date: "1263, December 13"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-04-21"
modified: "2021-04-14"
url: "/letter/25403.html"
senders:
  - id: 25398
    name: Mathilde of Brabant
    iname: mathilde of brabant
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext31">We Mathilde, countess of Holland, make known to those in the present as well as the future who will look over the present charter that we have conferred on the religious congregation of Beguines in Gravenzande out of reverence for God and the worship of religion as well as indulgence for our sins, the whole area which they will have possessed up to our time and surrounded by their own labors and expenses with ditches and trees, to be possessed perpetually with the right of free ownership.</p><p class="Bodytext31CxSpMiddle">That this our gift remain firm and stable, we have had the present letter inscribed and fortified by our seal.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; <br>Dated in the 1263rd year of the Lord, on the day of St. Lucy, at Gravenzande.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext51">Nos Maghtildis comitissa Hollandie notum facimus tam presentibus quam futuris presentem cartulam inspecturis quod nos relligiose&nbsp; congregationi beckinarum in Grauezande ob reverentiam Dei ac relligionis cultum necnon peccatorum nostrorum indulgentiam, aream totam quam propriis laboribus et expensis fossis et arboribus succinxerunt et actenus nostris temporibus possederunt, perpetuo contulimus iure proprietatis libere possidendam.</p><p class="Bodytext51">Ut autem hec donatio nostra rata et stabilis perseveret, presentem litteram fecimus conscribi et sigillo nostra provide communiri.</p><p class="Bodytext51">Datum anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo sexagesimo III°, in die beate Lucie, apud Grauenzande.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The countess records the gift of land to a congregation of Beguines.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</em>, ed. A.C.F.Koch,&nbsp; 3.350, #1334.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1263, December 13