---
letter_id: "25407"
title: "A letter from Mathilde"
ititle: "a letter from mathilde"
ltr_date: "1264, April 18 or June 24 (1265, April 3)"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-04-21"
modified: "2015-04-21"
url: "/letter/25407.html"
senders:
  - id: 25398
    name: Mathilde of Brabant
    iname: mathilde of brabant
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>We, Mathilde, countess of Holland and mother of lord William, formerly/late illustrious king of the Romans, make known to all who will look over the present letter that we have heard and we produce testimony to this effect eternally that our beloved son lord William, formerly/late king of the Romans always august, for the remedy of his soul and those of his antecedents, having considered the necessity of a new establishment of the nuns of Koningsveld, conferred the right of patronage of the church of Pijnakker and that church with all its revenues, when William the rector and pastor of the church at that time should have left or died, on said nuns, liberally and absolutely, to be possessed perpetually in peace and quiet, with a view to divine retribution.&nbsp; Moreover lord Floris, knight, and lady Aleide, formerly wife of lord John of Avesne, guardians of Holland and Zeeland, successively ratified the gift of said church by our beloved son, favorably and piously, as is fully contained in their letters.</p><p>In witness and perpetual endurance of which thing, we have conferred the present strengthened with the protection of our seal on this.</p><p>Dated&nbsp; in the 1264th year of the Lord.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext31">Nos Megthildis, comitissa Hollandie et mater domini Willelmi quondam regis Romanorum illustris, notum facimus universis presentem litteram inspecturis quod audivimus et ob hoc merito testimonium perhibebimus in eternum quod dilectus filius noster dominus Willelmus quondam Romanorum rex semper augustus ob remedium anime sue et suorum antecessorum,<span><span> considerata necessitate novelle plantationis sanctimonialium de Conigsvelt, ius patronatus ecclesie de Pinackere et ipsam ecclesiam cum omnibus proventibus suis, cedente vel decedente Wilhelmo rectore</span></span> et pastore tunc temporis<span><span> ipsius ecclesie, dictis sanctimonialibus divine retributionis intuitu liberaliter</span></span> et absolute contulit quiete et pacifice perpetuo possi<span><span>dendam. </span></span>Preterea donationem ecclesie memorate dilecti filii nostri,<span><span> dominus Florentius </span></span>miles et domina<span><span> Aleydis quondam uxor domini Iohannis de Auesnis,</span></span> tutores<span><span> Hollandie et Zelandie</span></span> successive, favorabiliter et<span><span> pie ratificaverunt,</span></span> sicut in litteris eorundem plenius continetur.</p><p class="Bodytext31">In cuius rei testimonium et perpetuam firmitatem, presentem litteram<span><span> sigilli nostri munimine roboratam</span></span> contulimus super eo. &nbsp;</p><p class="Bodytext31">Datum anno Domini M° CC°&nbsp; sexagesimo quarto.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The countess affirms the gift her son William made towards a new establishment of nuns, a gift later ratified by his brother and sister.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</em>, ed. A.C.F.Koch, 3.412-13, #1384.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1264, April 18 or June 24 (1265, April 3)