---
letter_id: "25405"
title: "A letter from Mathilde"
ititle: "a letter from mathilde"
ltr_date: "1264, July 26"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-04-21"
modified: "2021-04-14"
url: "/letter/25405.html"
senders:
  - id: 25398
    name: Mathilde of Brabant
    iname: mathilde of brabant
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext51">M[athilde] countess of Holland to all who those looking over the presents, greetings in Jesus Christ, son of the Virgin.</p><p class="Bodytext51">We wish all to know that we, wishing to give aid to the indigence of our beloved and faithful cleric Lambert for the industry of his service and honesty,with the consent and will of the lord abbot of the Island of the blessed Virgin who on being fully asked consented altogether to our will in this, [we] wish to confer the custody of Gravenzande to be possessed perpetually, knowing most certainly that whatever shall be given to that protector by the protector of the presents on the possession of said custody of honor and comfort or even, let it not be, harm, we take on us and make known that it was done.</p><p class="Bodytext51">In witness of which thing, we have offered the present letters signed with the mark of our seal.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><p class="Bodytext51">Dated in the year of the Lord1264, on the next Saturday after the feast of St. Mary Magdalene.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext41">M. comitissa Hollandie universis presentium inspectoribus salutem in Virginis filio Iesu Christo.</p><p class="Bodytext41">Nosse volumus universos quod nos Lamberto dilecto ac fideli clerico nostro, ob sue servitutis ac honestatis industriam indigencie sue succurrere cupientes, assensu et voluntate domini abbatis de Insula beate Virginis plenius requisito qui nostro in hoc consentit totaliter voluntati, custodiam in Grauenzande conferimus perpetue possidendam, scientes certissime quod quicquid eidem Lamberto conservatori conservatori presentium super possessione dicte custodie honoris et commodi vel etiam molestie, quod absit, allatum fuerit, nobis reputamus et retrahimus esse factum.</p><p class="Bodytext41">In cuius rei testimonium presentes litteras sibi porreximus nostri sigilli caractere consignatas.</p><p class="Bodytext41">Datum anno Domini M CC LXIIII, proximo sabbato post festum beate Marie Mag­dalene.</p><p></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The countess bestows a life position on an indigent cleric as a reward for his service.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Oorkondenboek van Holland en Zeeland tot 1299</em>, ed. A.C.F.Koch,&nbsp; 3.386-87, #1362.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1264, July 26