---
letter_id: "25425"
title: "A letter from Aldhelm"
ititle: "a letter from aldhelm"
ltr_date: "670's"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-05-28"
modified: "2015-05-28"
url: "/letter/25425.html"
senders:
  - id: 25424
    name: Aldhelm, abbot of Malmesbury
    iname: aldhelm, abbot of malmesbury
    type: people
    url: /people/25424.html
receivers:
  - id: 25423
    name: Sigegyth
    iname: sigegyth
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25423.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To the most cherished and beloved sister, with sincere affection of charity to me, the venerable Sigegyth, humble Aldhelm, serving with the unworthy name of abbot, greetings in the Lord.</p><p>Your kindness should know that I questioned the pontiff about the baptism of the sister, [and] he ---gave permission for that nun to be baptized, but only privately and&nbsp; secretly.&nbsp; I greet you earnestly, o Sigegyth, from the deepest chamber of the heart, begging with submissive prayers, that you not cease to occupy your mind with assiduous meditation on Scripture, so that you may fulfill the sentence of the writer of Psalms, saying (1.2):&nbsp; He will meditate day and night on his law.&nbsp; And again the Psalmist testifies to this, saying (119.103):&nbsp; How sweet your eloquence in my mouth.&nbsp; And others.&nbsp; Let all the sisters be mindful of my prayers, pray humbly through Christ who tells the Apostle [since the Apostle says] (James 5.16):&nbsp; The assiduous prayer of the just man is worth much.&nbsp;</p><p>Hail.&nbsp; Ten times most beloved, indeed a hundred and a thousand.&nbsp; May God keep you well.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Dilectissimae atque amantissimae sorori, et mihi sincero caritatis affectu venerandae Osgithae [Sigegythae], Aldhelmus supplex, indigno Abbatis vocabulo functus, in Domino Salutem.</p><p>Cognoscat vestra almitas de baptismo sororis, me interrogasse Pontificem, qui licentiam dedit baptizari illam sanctimonialem, sed tantum clam et latenter.&nbsp; Saluto te diligenter, Osgith [O Sigegyth], ex intimo cordis cubiculo, subnixis precibus obsecrans, ut assidua Scripturam meditatione mentem tuam occupare non desistas, quatenus Psalmographi sententiam compleas dicentis (1.2):&nbsp; In lege ejus meditabitur die ac nocte.&nbsp; Et idem Psalmista hoc item testatur dicens (119.103):&nbsp; Quam dulcia faucibus meis eloquia tua.&nbsp; Et reliqua.&nbsp; Orationum vero mearum ut memores sint omnes sorores, per Christum suppliciter obsecra, qui dicit Apostolo [quia dicit Apostolus] (Jacob.5.16):&nbsp; Multum valet deprecatio justi assidua.&nbsp; Vale. Decies dilectissima, imo centies et millies.&nbsp; Te Deus valere faciat.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Aldhelm was abbot in Malmesbury in 670’s when he wrote this letter to Sigegyth, answering her question about baptising a nun. Lapidge and Herren note that the practice of re-baptism in England in this period was questionable, hence the bishop's desire to keep the act secret, though he permits it, see <i>Aldhelm, The Prose Works</i>, trans. Michael Lapidge and Michael Herren (Cambridge:&nbsp; D.S. Brewer, 1979), n.44, p.203. &nbsp;The dates of Aldhelm’s life are not certain.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Sancti Aldhelmi, Opera quae extant omnia</i>, ed. J.A. Giles (Oxford, 1844), 90; also in MGH Auctorum Antiquissimorum Tomus 15. The name of the nun and a correction to the text from the MGH is given in brackets.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>670's