---
letter_id: "25448"
title: "A letter from Raymond Rogeri"
ititle: "a letter from raymond rogeri"
ltr_date: "1115, September 4"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-08-11"
modified: "2016-04-12"
url: "/letter/25448.html"
senders:
  - id: 25778
    name: Raymond Rogeri
    iname: raymond rogeri
    type: people
    url: /people/25778.html
receivers:
  - id: 21274
    name: Bernard Ato IV
    iname: bernard ato iv
    type: people
    url: /people/21274.html
  - id: 25426
    name: Cecilia of Provence
    iname: cecilia of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25426.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I Raymond Rogeri am the seller to you viscount Bernard-Ato and the lady viscountess your wife Cecilia and your children, I sell you my allod which I have and ought to have in Limoux &nbsp;and in its boundaries, except what Ralph of Flaciano holds there.&nbsp;&nbsp; Of my said allod, I sell you the men and women, lands and vineyards, dwellings and towers, fields, mills and what I have in said Limoux … without retaining anything for 20 Ugonian [local] solidos which you gave me and from this amount whatever did not remain with you buyers and you will give me Raymond &nbsp;Rogerii to eat and drink and be clothed all the days of my life with honors.&nbsp; This charter was made on the second nones of September, in the reign of king Louis.&nbsp; Sign of Raymond Rogerii.&nbsp; Sign of Bernard Pons of Aquaviva.&nbsp; Sign of William Calvet.&nbsp; Sign of Peter Arnald of Cadarona.&nbsp; Sign of Ralph of Flaciano wrote earlier in the year 1115, etc.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext31">In nomine Domini.&nbsp; Ego Raymundus Rogerii venditor sum vobis vicecomiti Bernardo-Atonis &amp; dominae vicecomitissae uxori vestrae Caeciliae atque infantibus vestris, vendo vobis alodium meum quem habeo &amp; habere debeo in Limoso &amp; in suis terminiis, excepto hoc quod Radulfus de Flaciano inde tenet. De praedicto alodio meo vendo vobis ipsos homines &amp;t foeminas, terras &amp; vineas, mansiones &amp; turres, areas, molinos &amp; hoc [quod] in praedicto Limoso habeo... sine ulla retinentia prop­ter xx solidos Ugonencos quos mihi dedistis, &amp; de isto pretio apud vos emptores quidquam non remansit, &amp; vos mihi Raimundo Rogerii donetis mihi manducare &amp; bibere &amp; vestire omnibus diebus vitae meae cum honorificentia. Carta facta II nonas septembris, regnante Ludovico rege. S. Raimundi Rogerii. S. Bernardi Pontii de Aquaviva. S. Guillelmi Calvet. S. Petri Arnaldi de Cadarona. S. Radulfi de Fla­ciano olim scripsit anno MCXV, &amp;c.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This letter records the sale of an allod to the count and countess.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Histoire Générale de Languedoc&nbsp;&nbsp; Hgl 5.852-54, #456.1, CCCLXXI.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1115, September 4