---
letter_id: "25455"
title: "A letter from Aymeri and Ermengard of Narbonne"
ititle: "a letter from aymeri and ermengard of narbonne"
ltr_date: "1118, February 12"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-08-11"
modified: "2021-04-04"
url: "/letter/25455.html"
senders:
  - id: 25454
    name: Aymeri and Ermengard of Narbonne
    iname: aymeri and ermengard of narbonne
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21274
    name: Bernard Ato IV
    iname: bernard ato iv
    type: people
  - id: 25426
    name: Cecilia of Provence
    iname: cecilia of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of God.&nbsp; I Aymeri, viscount of Narbonne and my wife Ermengard [we] give&nbsp; and in giving affirm to you Bernard-Ato and your wife Cecilia and your sons Roger and Raymond, that from this hour forward we shall not prevent, nor will any man from our land by our will, all men and merchants from going through your whole land, buying and selling salt or whatever they wished.&nbsp; We make this to you and your wife and your sons Roger and Raymond without any deceit and by such agreement that not I nor any man or woman may be able to break it towards you or your posterity in perpetuity.&nbsp; This charter was made on the 2nd Ides of February, Monday, in the years of the lord’s incarnation 1117, in the rule of king Louis. Sign of Richard of Murvel.&nbsp; Sign of Bernard of Canet.&nbsp; Sign of Guilherm of Cognat. Sign of Peter Raymond. Sign of Gormund.&nbsp; Sign of Gerall de Latorta.&nbsp; Sign of Bernard Amato.&nbsp; Sign of Berengar Stephen.&nbsp; Sign of Peter Sicfred.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Dei nomine. Ego Aimericus vicecomes Narbonensis &amp; uxor mea Hermengardis donamus &amp; donando affirmamus tibi Bernardo-Atonis &amp; uxori tuae Caeciliae &amp; filiis vestris Rogerio atque Raymundo, quod de ista hora in antea non vetabimus nec homo de nostra terra pro nostra voluntate, quod non vadant omnes homines &amp; mercatores per totam terram vestram, ementes &amp; vendentes sal vel quidquid voluerint. Hoc autem facimus tibi &amp; uxori tuae &amp; filiis tuis Rogerio &amp; Raymundo sine omni inganno &amp; tali conventu, quod nec ego vel ullus homo vel foemina nequeant hoc infringere vobis vel posteritati vestrae in perpetuum. Facta carta II idus februarii, feria II, anno ab Incarnatione Domini mcxvii, regnante Ludovico rege. S. Sichardi de Murvel. S. Bernardi de Canet. S. Guilhermi de Cognat. S. Petri Raymundi. S. Gormundi. S. Gerall de Latorta. S. Bernardi Amati. S. Berengarii Stephani. S. Petri Sicfredi.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This letter records the settlement of a dispute over the salt of which Aymeri had impeded the transport and sale. &nbsp;Aymeri and Ermengard (not otherwise identified) are the parents of the well-known viscountess Ermengard of Narbonne.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Histoire Générale de Languedoc</em>, &nbsp;5.852-54, #456.5, CCCLXXI</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1118, February 12