---
letter_id: "25469"
title: "A letter from Raymond and Hugo"
ititle: "a letter from raymond and hugo"
ltr_date: "1125, April 1 "
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-08-16"
modified: "2021-04-04"
url: "/letter/25469.html"
senders:
  - id: 25468
    name: Raymond and Hugo, sons of Bernard Agullon
    iname: raymond and hugo, sons of bernard agullon
    type: people
    url: /people/25468.html
receivers:
  - id: 21274
    name: Bernard Ato IV
    iname: bernard ato iv
    type: people
    url: /people/21274.html
  - id: 25426
    name: Cecilia of Provence
    iname: cecilia of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25426.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Be it known to all that in the 1125th year from the incarnation of the Lord, on the kalends of April, in the reign of king Louis.&nbsp; IN the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I Raymond and I Hugo his brother, sons of Bernard Agullon for ourselves and our successors sell and hand over and release in faith and without deceit to you Bernard-Ato viscount of Béziers and your wife Cecilia and your children and successors namely our part of the fief which our father held from you and your ancestors, namely two parts of the property of Cagnaco and those that pertain to it and two parts of the fief which the lords of Arpalan(icis) held from our father and two parts of the tax of Calvisson. The price of this sale and release is 30 Melgueil solidos, all of which you have paid us.&nbsp; This was done in the presence of William Bernard of Chaume and Ralph of Vachères and Bertrand of Turre and William of Bernin (?Bernicens) and Raymond of Vezonobres and Raymond Cantarelle and Peter Iscafred.&nbsp; William wrote it.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext31">Notum sit omnibus, quod anno ab Incarnatione Domini MCXXV, kalendis aprilis, regnante Lodoyco rege. In nomine Domini. Ego Raimundus &amp;c ego Ugo ejus frater ambo filii Bernardi Agullonis per nos &amp; per omnes successores nostros vendimus &amp; contradimus &amp; in perpetuum dimittimus per fidem &amp; sine inganno (ibi Bernardo-Atoni Biterrensi vicecomiti &amp; tibi uxori ejus Cecilie &amp; infantibus &amp; successoris vestris, scilicet nostram par­tem de fevo quod pater noster tenuit de vobis &amp; de antecessoribus vestris, sci­licet duas partes de manso de Cagnaco &amp; de illis que ad eum pertinent &amp; duas partes de fevo quas domini de Arpalanicis tenuerunt de patre nostro &amp; duas partes de fisco de Calvicione. Est autem precium hujus venditionis &amp; dimissionis solidos XXX Melgorienses, quos omnes nobis bene persolvistis. Hoc est factum in presentia Guilelmi Bernardi de Calmis &amp; Radulfi deVacheriis &amp; Bertrandi de Turre &amp; Guilelmi Bernicensis &amp; Raimundi Vezonobrensis &amp; Raimundi Cantarelle &amp; Petri Iscafredi.</p><p class="Bodytext31"><i>Guilelmus scripsit.</i></p><p class="Bodytext31"><i>&nbsp;</i></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The letter records a sale of two parts of their property and of a fief and of taxes for 30 Melgueil solidos already paid to the brothers by the count and countess.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Histoire Générale de Languedoc,</i>&nbsp; 5.908-11, #483.6, CCCXCV.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1125, April 1 