---
letter_id: "25465"
title: "A letter from Arnald of Laurano"
ititle: "a letter from arnald of laurano"
ltr_date: "1124, January 24"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-08-16"
modified: "2016-04-12"
url: "/letter/25465.html"
senders:
  - id: 25464
    name: Arnald of Laurano
    iname: arnald of laurano
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21274
    name: Bernard Ato IV
    iname: bernard ato iv
    type: people
  - id: 25426
    name: Cecilia of Provence
    iname: cecilia of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>IN the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I Arnald of Laurano and my nephews, Peter and Arnald, are donators to you Bernard-Ato viscount and your wife Cecilia and your children; we therefore give to you in allod my town of Laurano with all its appurtenances, etc., so that it may be an allod to you and your power in perpetuity.&nbsp; This charter was made on the 9th kalends of February, Thursday, in the reign of king Louis.&nbsp; Sign of Arnald and his nephews Peter and Arnald who signed this charter.&nbsp; Sign of Bernard Aurato.&nbsp; Sign of Bernard of Canet.&nbsp; Sign of Arnald Pelapol.&nbsp; Sign of Bernard Pons of Aquaviva.&nbsp; Sign of Guillerm Calvet of Tresmals.&nbsp; William wrote it by order of said Arnald of Laurano and his nephews Peter and Arnald, in the year 1124 of the Lord’s Incarnation.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext31">In nomine Domini. Ego Arnaldus de Laurano &amp; nepotes mei Petrus &amp; Arnaldus donatores sumus vobis Bernardo-Atonis vicecomiti &amp; uxori vestrae Caeciliae &amp; infantibus vestris; donamus igitur vobis ad alodium castrum meum de Lau­rano cum omnibus suis pertinentibus, &amp;c. ut sit alodium vestri &amp; potestati vestrae in perpetuum. Facta carta ista IX kalendas februarii, feria v, regnante Ludovico rege. S. Arnaldi &amp; nepotum Petri &amp; Arnaldi qui sic istam cartam firmaverunt. S. Bernardi Aurati. S. Bernardi de Caneto. S. Arnaldi Pelapol. S. Bernardi Poncii de Aquaviva. S. Guillermi Calveti <i>de Tresmals</i>. Guillelmus scripsit jussione praedictorum Arnaldi de Laurano &amp; nepotum ejus Petri &amp; Arnaldi, anno MCXXIV Incarnationis dominicae.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Arnald and his nephews give the town of Laurano to the count and countess in allod. &nbsp;(Nepotes may mean grandsons, but that seems less likely.)</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Histoire Générale de Languedoc,&nbsp;</em>5.908-11, #483.4, CCCXCV</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1124, January 24