---
letter_id: "25519"
title: "A letter from Roger, Count of Foix"
ititle: "a letter from roger, count of foix"
ltr_date: "1095, April 22"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-09-06"
modified: "2016-02-24"
url: "/letter/25519.html"
senders:
  - id: 25478
    name: Roger, count of Foix
    iname: roger, count of foix
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21274
    name: Bernard Ato IV
    iname: bernard ato iv
    type: people
  - id: 25489
    name: Ermengard of Carcassonne
    iname: ermengard of carcassonne
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I count Roger am&nbsp; mortgager to you viscountess Ermengard and to your son Bernard-Ato; I mortgage to you my honor which I have in the county of Toulouse, that is my towns which are called Prades and Karvecias, with all their territories, for the price agreed on between you and me, that is two thousand Rouergue solidos, old and current, measured eighth.&nbsp; As written above, so I mortgage to you said towns and all I have now and should have in them and in their territories, men and women, lands, cultivated and uncultivated, woods, barren lands, waters, pastures, houses, villages, gardens and orchards, and all things in all things, with the usage and services of all the above.&nbsp; On such account I mortgage to you all the abovewritten, that you may hold and possess from this day the said mortgage from the Feast of all Saints to the Feast of All Saints, until I pay you said price on the Feast of All Saints.&nbsp; I also mortgage to you that castle which they call Dun with all its territories and with all its appurtenances; by such agreement that if after a year I shall have returned from Jerusalem and this pilgrimage at the head of that finished year I shall not have paid you said two thousand solidos of said money, you will hold and have said castle Dun with its whole honor and with those named towns Prades and Karvecias in mortgage from the Feast of all Saints to the Feast of All Saints, until I pay you the prescribed price on the Feast of all Saints.&nbsp;&nbsp; And so may this charter of mortgage remain firm and stable.&nbsp; Which was made on 10 kalends of May, Tuesday, in the 1095th year of the lord’s Incarnation, in the reign of king Philip.&nbsp; Sign + of count Roger I who ordered this charter to be written and signed it.&nbsp; Sign + of Bernard-Ameli of Ravad.&nbsp; Sign of Peter-Raymond of Ravad.&nbsp; Sign of Raymond Sicfred of Alaric.&nbsp; Osmond wrote this on the day and year named.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine Domini. Ego Rodgerius comes inpignorator sum tibi Ermengardi vicecomitissae &amp; filio tuo Bernardo-Attonis; inpignoro vobis ipsum meum honorem quem habeo in comitatu Tolosano , id est ipsas meas villas que vocantur Pradas &amp; Karvecias cum omnibus illarum terminis, propter precium quod inter me &amp; vos convenit, hoc sunt duo milia solidi de dinariis Ugonencos, exibiles &amp; percurribiles dreit oitenos. Sicut superius scriptum est, sic inpignoro vobis ipsas jamdictas villas &amp; totum quod habeo modo &amp; habere debeo in ipsis &amp; in ipsarum terminiis, homines &amp; feminas, terras, culta &amp; inculta, silvas, garricias, aquas, pascua, casas, casales, ortos &amp; ortales, &amp; omnia in omnibus, cum istorum omnium predictorum usibus &amp; serviciis. In tali vero ratione inpignoro vobis hec omnia prescripta, ut ab hodierna die teneatis &amp; possideatis is­tam pignoram predictam de martror in martror, usque ego vobis jamdictum precium persolvam ad martror. Item inpignoro vo­bis ipsum castellum quod vocant Dun cum omnibus suis terminis &amp; cum omnibus suis pertinentiis; in tali conventu quod si anno peracto quo fuero reversus Ihrusalem aut de ista peregrinatione, ad caput ipsius peracti anni non persolvero vobis jamdictos duos milia solidos de jamdicta moneta, ipsum suprascriptum castellum Dun cum omni suo honore &amp; cum ipsas suprascriptas villas Pradas &amp; Karvecias teneatis &amp; habeatis in pignora de martror in martror, usque vobis prescriptum precium persolvam ad martror. Et sic ista carta pignorationis firma &amp; stabilis permaneat. Que facta X kalendas mai, III feria, anno millesimo. xcv Incarnationis dominicae, regnante rege Philippo. Sig+num Rodgerii comitis qui sic istam cartam scribi mandavi atque firmavi. Sig+num Bernardi-Ameli de Ravad. Signum Petri-Raimundi de Ravad. Signum Ramundi Sicfredi de Alarico.</p><p>Osmundus scripsit die &amp; anno jamdicto.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Roger records the mortage of his honor in Toulouse to Ermengard and her son.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Histoire Générale de Languedoc</i> 5.737-38, #388.3, CCCX.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1095, April 22