---
letter_id: "25546"
title: "A letter to Miro Isarn"
ititle: "a letter to miro isarn"
ltr_date: "1067, August 5"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-10-13"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/25546.html"
senders:
  - id: 25529
    name: Almodis of La Marche
    iname: almodis of la marche
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25529.html
  - id: 25531
    name: Raymond Berengar I
    iname: raymond berengar i
    type: people
    url: /people/25531.html
receivers:
  - id: 25545
    name: Miro Isarn
    iname: miro isarn
    type: people
    url: /people/25545.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I, Raymond, by the grace of God count of Barcelona, and Almodis, by the favor of God countess, we are donors to you, Miro Isarn and your wife Gerberga.&nbsp; By this document of our donation, we give you that cliff which is called Miravet, with that quarter which is in its circuit; and it came to us by the generosity of God who gave this to us from the power of the Saracens; and it is in the furthest part of the Marches next to Spain, within the boundary of Stopaniano and Caborrels. And it abuts on the east, the edge of Encalada by those oaks from which crosses are made, and it crosses through that barrier and goes to the head of said Encalada at that Spelunca [cave?]; in the south, on that ridge by those crosses that were made there, and crosses into the little district of Rodezen up to the other ridge which is called the Mages, and goes through that little gorge of the valley of Locars up to the mountain of Sischer; in the west, in Molar as it diverts the water to Miravet; in the north, again in the head of that Mata Nigra through those fissures&nbsp; that are made there and goes to the rock which is at the head of the land that was the priest Galind’s, and it crosses through the fissure that was put in Godmar’s land and up to the district of the forest at the head of the Kaviu land up to the head of that crest.&nbsp; As much as these abutments include and these boundaries encircle, we give you as your own allod with half of that tithe which will come out of it; the other half, indeed, of that tithe we retain to the town of Stopaniano.&nbsp; And all the aforesaid we give you by such consideration that in said cliff you build a tower of stone and lime or stone and plaster, and you and your posterity cannot sell nor in any way alienate this except to us and our posterity.&nbsp; You and your posterity cannot make another lord, except us and our posterity; and we can always make war and peace against all men and women over it.&nbsp; And thus by our right we hand over all this into your dominion to do what you will.&nbsp; If any one, indeed, wished to disrupt this gift, he could not claim what he sought but must pay all the above doubly; and from then on, this document would remain firm and stable for all time.&nbsp; Which was made on the nones of August in the 7th year of the reign of king Philip.&nbsp; And the men of Stopaniano may have pasture and wood there, and the men of said quarter of Miravet may similarly have pasture and wood within the boundaries of Stopaniano.&nbsp; Sign+ of Bernard Raymond of Camarasa.&nbsp; Sign+ of Gerall Alaman.&nbsp; Sign+ of Bernard Amati.&nbsp; Sign+ of Arnall Miro.&nbsp; Sign+ of William Bernard of Odena.&nbsp; Sign+ of Berengar Arnald.&nbsp; Sign+ of Compano Bernard.&nbsp; Sign+ of William Bernard.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine Domini. Ego Raimundus, gracia Dei Barchinonensis co­mes, et Almodis, nutu Dei comitissa, donatores sumus vobis, Mironi Isarni et uxori tue Girberge. Per hanc nostre donacionis scripturam donamus vobis ipsam rupem que dicitur Miravet, cum ipsa quadra que est in circuitu eius; et advenit nobis per largicionem Dei qui hoc nobis dedit de potestate sarracenorum ; et est in extremis finibus Marchiarum, iuxta Ispaniam, intra terminum de Stopaniano et de Caborrels. Et habet affrontacionem : ab oriente in margine de Encalada per ipsos quercus in quibus sunt cruces facte, et transit per ipsa sponda et vadit usque in caput de predicta Encalada ad ipsam Speluncam; de meridie in ipsa serra per ipsas cruces quas ibi fuerunt facte, et transit in podiolo de Rodezen usque in alia serra que dicitur de les Mages, et vadit per ipsum congostel de valle de Locars usque in montem de Sischer; de occiduo in ipso Molar, sicut divertit aquam ad ipsum Miravet; de circio, iterum, in capite de ipsa Mata Nigra per ipsas ficxuras que sunt ibi facte, et vadit usque in petram que est in capite de terra que fuit Galindi, presbiteri, et transit per ficxuram que fuit posita in terra Godmari, et usque ad podium de ipsa silva in capite de terra Kaviu usque in capite de ipsa coma. Quantum iste affrontaciones includunt et isti termini ambiunt, damus vobis ad vestrum proprium alodium cum medietate de ipsa decima que inde exierit; aliam, namque, medietatem ipsius decime retinemus ad castrum de Stopanian. Et supra dicta omnia damus vobis sub deliberacione taliter, ut in prephata rupe turrem (h) edificetis aut de petra et calce, aut de petra et gipseo, et non possitis hoc vendere nec ullo modo alienare nec vos nec posteritas vestra, nisi ad nos et ad posteritatem nostram. Seniorem et alium non possitis facere, nisi nos et posteritatem nostram, nec vos nec posterita vestra; et possimus inde semper facere guerram et pacem contra cunctos homines et feminas. Et sic de nostro iure tradimus hoc totum in vestrum dominium ad faciendum quod volueritis. Si quis, vero, hoc donum voluerit dirrumpere, non valeat vendicare quod requisierit, sed conponat in duplo predicta omnia; et deincebs, hec scriptura firma et stabilis permaneat omni tempore. Que fuit facta nonas augusti VII anno regni regis Philippi. Et homines de Stopaniano habeant ibi paschua et ligna, et homines [de] predicta quadra de Miravet similiter habeant infra terminos de Stopaniano paschua et ligna. Sig+num Bernardus Raimundi de Camarasa. Sig+num Geralli Alamannni. Sig+num Bernardi Amati. Sig+num Arnalli Mironis. Sig+num Guillelmi Bernardi de Odena. Sig+num Berengarii Arnaldi. Sig+num Companni Bernardi. Sig+num Guillelmi Bernardi.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Donation by the count and countess to Miro Isarn of the cliff of Miraveto, within the boundary of the town of Stopaniano.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>LFM 1.59-60, #45.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1067, August 5