---
letter_id: "25568"
title: "A letter from Raymond, son of Guisla"
ititle: "a letter from raymond, son of guisla"
ltr_date: "1053-71"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-10-13"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/25568.html"
senders:
  - id: 25567
    name: Raymond, son of Guisla
    iname: raymond, son of guisla
    type: people
    url: /people/25567.html
receivers:
  - id: 25529
    name: Almodis of La Marche
    iname: almodis of la marche
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25529.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>I Raymond, son of the late viscountess Guisla, swear that I shall be faithful from this day forward to you, lady Almodis, countess, daughter of the woman Amelia, by direct faith without trickery and without fraud and evil artifice and without deception, on your life and your members which are held in your body, and every honor that lord Raymond, count, has given to you and will give in the future, excepting that honor that I hold in the county of Girona through countess Ermessind.&nbsp; As is written above, so I shall hold and keep this, I said Raymond to you said countess by direct faith without deception, excepting what you, said countess, should release me of by your gracious spirit without force.&nbsp; By God and these saints.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Iuro Reimundus, filius qui sum Guisle, vicecomitisse, quod ab hac die et deincebs fidelis ero tibi, domne Almodis, comitisse, filia qui es Amelia, femina, per directam fidem sine engan et sine fraude et malo ingenio et sine ulla decepcione de tua vita et de tuis membris que in corpore tuo se tenent, et de omni honore que domnus Raimundus, comes, tibi habet datam et in antea dederit, exceptus ipsum honorem quam ego teneo in comitatu Gerundensem per Ermessindem comitissam. Sicut superius scriptum est, sic o tenre et o atenre ego predictus Rai­mundus tibi, predicte comitisse, per directam fidem sine engan, excep­tus hoc que tu, predicte comitisse, me absolveris tuo grato animo sine forcia. Per Deum et istos sanctos.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Oath to Almodis for the honor which he holds in Girona from countess Ermessind.&nbsp; Oath #203 was taken by the same man to Raymond, to defend Barcelona and the bishopric of Holy Cross and St. Eulalia and the counties of Penitens, Osona, the city of Minorissa, the bishopric of St. Peter of Vico and the city and county of Girona, and bishopric of St. [Mary] of Girona, for the honor which he holds in Girona from countess Ermessind.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>LFM 1.215, #204.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1053-71