---
letter_id: "25566"
title: "A letter from Galfred and Legard"
ititle: "a letter from galfred and legard"
ltr_date: "1066, July 26"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-10-13"
modified: "2021-11-19"
url: "/letter/25566.html"
senders:
  - id: 25565
    name: Galfred and Legard
    iname: galfred and legard
    type: people
    url: /people/25565.html
receivers:
  - id: 25529
    name: Almodis of La Marche
    iname: almodis of la marche
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25529.html
  - id: 25531
    name: Raymond Berengar I
    iname: raymond berengar i
    type: people
    url: /people/25531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of God.&nbsp; The law orders by this document of sale, that it have full validity.&nbsp; Therefore I, in the name of Christ, Galfred and his wife Legard, [we] are sellers to you [pl.], Raymond, by the grace of God count and marquess, and his wife Almodis, by the favor of God countess, buyers.&nbsp; By this document, the confirmation of our document of sale, we sell you that town of Grevalossa with lands and vineyards and woods that are there, and viaducts and returns of water sources,&nbsp; pastures, stones large and small; and in another place the quarter of Furmigossa with its boundaries and houses, cottages and gardens, viaducts and drains, fruit and non-fruit trees, that castle and that sector, our own [property] quite clear which came to us, to me Galfred through my parents and through any of my rights, and to me Legard, through my tithe and any rights.&nbsp; And all these with different kinds&nbsp; of meadows, pastures, barren lands, stones moveable and unmoveable, waters of waters coming in or out, as much as are necessary for all uses, as much as is there built or constructed, or henceforth, with God permitting, you can build or wish to.&nbsp; All the aforesaid in the county of Minorissa, this town has and abuts:&nbsp; in the east the boundary of the town Rigadel, in the south the boundary of the town Fulco, in the west of the town Maçanna, in the north of the town Castelar.&nbsp; As much as [they] encircle or retain and include all the above we sell to you completely to be fully your own; and all these from our right we hand over to you as proprietor with rule and power, with their exits and entries and boundaries and abutments and appurtenances, that it is permitted and released to you in the name of God to hold from this day and time to do whatever you wish.&nbsp; The price that you, said buyers, gave to us, sellers, we accept for that town of Gravalosa forty seven ounces of the best Barcelona gold and 2 <i>caficios*</i> of the best wine.&nbsp; And that price for the sector of Grevalossa which they call furmigossa is 60 and five marks of the best Barcelona gold which you, said buyers, gave to us and we, sellers, received in our hands from you, Raymond, by the grace of God count, and Almodis, by the favor of God countess, as is manifest.&nbsp; All the aforesaid,&nbsp; as heard above, we sell to you and hand over as proprietor, without any reservation.&nbsp; If I Gocfret [sic] or Legard or any man living or woman, of either sex, whatever person wished to injure, claim, disrupt or trouble or break this against you, he could not win but must pay you a hundred pounds of gold in weight with all the above four times over; and let this document of sale hold for you with validity forever.&nbsp; This charter of sale was made.&nbsp; Enacted this 7 kalends of August in the 6th year of the reign of Philip, king of the Franks.&nbsp; Sign+ of Galfred.&nbsp; Sign+ of Legard.&nbsp; We together as one had this sale written and we signed it and asked witnesses to sign.&nbsp; Sign+ of Gerovard Lobos.&nbsp; Sign+ of William Bernard.&nbsp; Sign+ of Arnal Mager.&nbsp; Sign+ of Mir Ricolf.&nbsp; Sign+ of Alleger.&nbsp; Sign+ of Guodamir.&nbsp; Sign+ of Sendret Gumila.&nbsp; Sign+ of Adalbert Barbes.&nbsp; Suniar, priest, who wrote this charter of sale and marked the days and years above.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Dei nomine. Lex iubet vendicionis per scripturam factam, plenam abeat firmitatem. Idcirco (ego) in Christi nomine, ego, Gaucfredus et coniux sua Legardis, venditores sumus vobis, Raimundus, gracia Dei comes et marchio, et coniux sua Adalmodis, nutu Dei comitissa, emptores. Per hanc scriptura, namque, firmamentum scripture vindicionis nostre vendimus vobis ipsum castrum de Grevalossa aput terras et vineis et bosco que ibidem est, et viaductibus et retdeuntibus aquis fontis, pastis, pasquis, petris maximis et minimis; et in alium locum quadra de Furmigossa cum suis terminis et cum cassas, cassalibus et cum ortis, ortalibus, viaductibus et retdeuntibus, arboribus fructuosis et infructuosis, ipsum castel et ipsa quadra, nostrum proprium bene francum qui a nobis avenit ad me, Geaucfre, per genitorum meorum vel per ullasque voces et ad me, Legardis, per meum decimum vel per ullasque meas voces. Et hec omnia sunt diversis generis pratis, pascuis, garicis, petras mobiles vel inmobiles, aquis aquarum iam adductibus vel reddeuntibus, quantum ad ussum ominem necessaria sunt, quantum ibidem edificatum vel constructum est, aut in antea, permittente Deo, edificare potueritis aut volueritis. Est, namque, prefata omnia in comitatum Minorissa, et abet ipsum castrum supranominatum affrontacionis: a parte orientis in terminum de castrum Rigadel, de meridie in terminum de castrum Fulcco, de occiduo in terminum de castrum Maçanna, de circii in ter­minum de castrum Castelar. Quantum ambiunt vel &lt;retinent&gt; et infra includunt, sic vendimus vobis prefata omnia integriter ad vestrum plenissimum proprium; et hec omnia de nostro iure in vestrum tradimus proprialiter cum dominio et potestatem, cum exi[i]s vel regressi[i]s et terminis et affrontacionibus atque pertinenciis earum, ut quidquid ab odierno die et tempore tenere facere quod volueritis, licitum et absolutum in Dei nomine vobis sit. Est precium, quod vos, emptores iam dictos, nobis, dedistis et nos, venditores, recepimus per ipsum castrum de Gravalossa uncias quadraginta septem de auro obtimo Barchinonensi et caficios II de vino obtimo. Et ipsum precium de ipsa quadra de Grevalossa que vocan[t] Furmigossa est precium lx mancossos et quinque de auro obtimo. Barchinonensi quod vos, emtores iam dictos, ad nobis donastis et nos, venditores, de manibus nostris recepimus de vobis Raimundo, gracia Dei comes, et de Almodis, nutu Dei comitissa, et est manifestum. Quem, vero, predicta hec omnia, sicut superius ressonat, sic vendimus vobis sive tradimus proprialiter, sine nulla reservacione. Quod si ego Gocfret aut Legards aut ullusque homo vivens vel femina, utriusque se(c)xus, qualibet persona hoc vobis in &lt;aliquo&gt; ledere, petere, disrumpere aut inquietare voluerit aut frangere, non hoc valeat vendicare, set componat vobis in vinculo auri liberas centum cum predicta omnia in quadruplo; et semper hec scriptura vendicionis firmitate vobis obtineat in seculum seculi. Facta carta vendicionis. Actum est hoc vii kalendas agustas anno vi que regni Filipii, rege Franconum. Sig+num Gaucfredus. Sig+num Legarts. Nos simul in unum, qui ista vendicione fecimus scribere et firmavimus et testes firmare rogavimus. Sig+num Gerovard Lobos. Sig+num Guilielm Bernard. Sig+num Arnal Mager. Sig+num Mir Ricolf. Sig+num Alleger. Sig+num Guodamir. Sig+num Sendret Gumila. Sig+num Adalbert Barbes. Suniarius, sacerdos, qui ista carta vendicionis scripsit et dies et annos supra impressum est.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Sale&nbsp;of the towns of Gravalosa and Furmigosa by Galfred Raymond and his wife Legard to the count and countess.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><ul><li><i>Cacifio</i> is a Spanish measure.&nbsp;</li></ul><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>LFM 1.204-05, #193. &nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1066, July 26