---
letter_id: "25583"
title: "A letter from Bonifilio Sanlani"
ititle: "a letter from bonifilio sanlani"
ltr_date: "1062, October 4"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-10-13"
modified: "2015-10-13"
url: "/letter/25583.html"
senders:
  - id: 25582
    name: Bonifilio Sanlani
    iname: bonifilio sanlani
    type: people
    url: /people/25582.html
receivers:
  - id: 25529
    name: Almodis of La Marche
    iname: almodis of la marche
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25529.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I, Bonifilio Sanlani am the seller to you, lady Almodis, countess by the grace of God, buyer.&nbsp; By this document of my sale I sell you my own allod, that is, one property, houses and courts, alone and on top of each other, with gutters and spouts and lands, namely cultivated and barren, and vineyards with those lands where they are set, and an orchard with many kinds of trees and uncultivated land and water source and pastures and valleys and mountains, inclined and flat.&nbsp; And all the above are in the county of Barcelona, in the territory of the town of Piera, which came to me, Bonefilio Sanlani, as prescribed allod by purchase with all rights.&nbsp; And all the above abuts:&nbsp; in the east vineyards which were the late bishop Guilbert’s, in north in the allod of Chastelet and Molela, in the south, the allod of Bernard Oliba, in the west the river of Annola.&nbsp; Whatever these abutments include, I sell all the above to you, completely and wholly, with their entries and exits, for the price of 25 ounces of refined gold and pure money of Barcelona weighed at ten marks to the ounce, the price which you, lady Almodis, countess, buyer, gave me, and I, seller, received in my hands and as is manifest nothing of that price remains with you, the buyer. All the aforesaid which I the seller sell to you, I hand over by my right into your rule and power, that you may do with it whatever you wish to do as completely your own.&nbsp; If I, the seller or any person of either sex, might try to break this charter of sale, it would not be valid, but he/she or I would pay you all the above triply with every improvement; and henceforth this charter of sale would remain firm for all time.&nbsp; This was enacted on 4th nones of October in the 3rd year of the reign of king Philip.&nbsp; +Sign of Bonifilio Sanlani, who ordered this charter of sale to be made, signed it and asked witnesses to sign.&nbsp; +Sign of Berengar, deacon, +Sign of Vivano, deacon.&nbsp; +Sign of William, deacon.&nbsp; +Sign of Bofil William.&nbsp; +Sign of Raymund Seniofred.&nbsp; +Sign of Miro, priest, who wrote this on the day and year above.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext21">In nomine Domini. Ego Bonifilius Sanlani venditor sum tibi, domna Almodis, gracia Dei comitisse, emptrice. Per hanc denique scripturam vendicionis mee sic vendo tibi alodium meum proprium, id est, mansum unum, casas et curtes, solis et superpositis, guttibus et stillicinios et terris, scilicet, cultis et heremis, et vineas ab ipsas terras ubi sunt fundatas, et orto ab arboribus multis generis et garricis et fonte et pascuis et vallibus et montes, pronum et planum. Et est predicta omnia in comitatu Barchinona, in termine de Chastrum Apiaria, qui mihi advenit prescripto alodio ad me, Bonefilius Sanlani, per meam comparacione per omnesque voces. Et affrontat prescripta omnia: de parte orientis in vineas qui fuerunt de Guilabertus, episcopus, qui est condam, de circi in ipso alodio de Chastelet et in ipsa Molela, de meridie in alodio de Bernardum Oliba, de occiduo in flumine de Annola. Quantum istas affrontaciones includunt, sic vendo tibi prescripta omnia, totum ab integre, simul cum ingressibus et exitibus suis, in propter pretium uncias xxv auri cogti et puri monete Barchinone pensatas de mancusis de decem in uncia, quod tu, domna Almodis chomitissa, emptrice, precium mihi dedisti(s), et ego, venditore, manibus meis recepi et nihil de ipso precio aput te, emptrice, non remansit, et est manifestum. Que(m), vero, predicta omnia que ego venditore tibi vindo de meum iure in tuum trado dominium et potestatem, ut facias exinde quodcumque velis facere ad tuum plenissimum proprium. Quod si ego venditore aut aliquis homo, sexus utriusque, qui contra ista charta &nbsp;vendicione venero aut venerit pro inrumpendum, nil valeat, sed componat aut componam tibi prescripta omnia in trip(p)lum cum omni sua inmelioracione; et in antea ista charca vendicio firma permaneat omnique tem­pore. Actum est hoc IIII nonas octobris anno III regni Philippi, regis. Sig+num Bonifilius Sanlani, qui ista charta vendicione fieri iussi, firmavi et testes firmare rogavi. Sig+num Berengarii, levite. Sig+num Vivani, levite. Sig+num Guilielmus, levite. Sig+num Bofil Guilielmi. Sig+num Reimundum Seniofredi. Sig+num Mironis, presbiteri, qui hec scripsit die et anno quod supra.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Sale of a property by Bonifilio Sanlani to the countess.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>LFM 1.353-5, #331. &nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1062, October 4