---
letter_id: "25589"
title: "A letter from Ermessind, sister of Miro Gilbert"
ititle: "a letter from ermessind, sister of miro gilbert"
ltr_date: "1067, January 25"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-10-13"
modified: "2021-03-29"
url: "/letter/25589.html"
senders:
  - id: 25588
    name: Ermessind, sister of Miro Gilbert
    iname: ermessind, sister of miro gilbert
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25529
    name: Almodis of La Marche
    iname: almodis of la marche
    type: woman
  - id: 25531
    name: Raymond Berengar I
    iname: raymond berengar i
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I the woman Ermesind am the seller to you, lord Raymond, count of Barcelona, and lady Almodis, countess, purchasers. By this document of my sale, indeed I sell to you that town of Capraria with all its building and appurtenances.&nbsp; And said town came to me through the gift of my father, bishop Guilbert.&nbsp; Said town, with all its appurtenances is in the county of Barcelona.&nbsp; And said town abuts all these: in the east Piera, in the north Midiona, in the south the boundary of Vite, in the west that of Claromonte.&nbsp; As much as these abutments enclose, I sell to you the said town of Capraria with all its buildings and appurtenances completely, together with its entries and exits, for the price of 30 ounces of pure gold of Barcelona money properly weighed, which price you, the buyers, gave me and I, the seller, took, with my hands, and nothing of that price remains with you the buyers, as is manifest. All the aforesaid which I sell to you, I hand over by my right into your rule and power to do whatever you might wish as your most complete property.&nbsp; If I, seller, or any other being of either sex, should attack or try to disrupt or breach this document of sale, he/she could not succeed, but he/she or I would pay you all the above triply with its improvements; and afterwards this writing of sale would remain firm for all time.&nbsp; This document of sale was made on the 8th kalends of February in the 7th year of the reign of king Philip. Sign+ of the woman Ermessind, I who ordered this charter of sale to be made, signed it, and asked witnesses to sign. &nbsp;+Sign of Raymond Donuci. +Sign of Berengar Donuci. &nbsp;&nbsp;+Sign of Arbert Bernard. +Sign of Berengar, deacon.&nbsp; +Sign of Berengar Raymond.&nbsp; +Sign of Bernard Bernardi.&nbsp; +Sign of Miro, priest, who wrote this, with the letters in line 5, on the day and year above.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine Domini.&nbsp; Ego Ermesindis femina venditrix sum vobis, domno Remundo, Barchinonensis comiti, et domne Almodi, comitisse, emptoribus.&nbsp; Per hanc, quippe, scripturam vendicionis mee sic vendo vobis ipsum castrum de Capraria cum omnibus suis edificiis et pertinenciis. Et advenit mihi prescriptum castrum per donum patris mei Guilaberti, episcopi.&nbsp; Est, autem, predictum castrum cum omnibus suis pertinenciis in comitatu Barchinonensi.&nbsp; Et affrontat iam dictum castrum cum iam dictis omnibus:&nbsp; a parte orientis in Apiaria, de circio in termine de Midiona, de meridie in termine de ipsa Vite, de occiduo in termine de Claromonte.&nbsp; Quantum istas affrontaciones includunt, sic vendo vobis predictum castrum de Capraria, cum omnibus suis edificiis et pertinenciis omnibus, ab integre, simul cum ingressibus et egressibus earum, propter precium uncias XXX auri puri monete Barcinone pensatas bene, quod vos, emptores, precium mihi dedistis, et ego vinditrice manibus meis recepi, nihilque de ipso precio apud vos, emptores, remansit, ut est manifestum.&nbsp; Que(m) vero prescripta omnia que ego vobis vindo, de meum iure in vestrum trado dominium et potestatem, ut faciatis exinde quodcunque velitis facere ad vestrum plenissimum proprium.&nbsp; Quod si ego, venditrice, aut aliquis homo, sexus utriusque, qui contra ista carta vendicione venero aut venerit pro inrrumpendum sive infringendum, nihil valeat, sed componat aut ego componam vobis prefata omnia in triplum cum omni sua melioracione; et in antea ista carta vendicio firma permaneat omnique tempore.&nbsp; Actum est hoc VIII kalendas februarii anno VII regni Philippi, regis.&nbsp; Sig+num Ermessindis, femina, qui ista carta vendicione fieri iussi, firmavi et testibus firmare rogavi.&nbsp; Sig+num Reimundo Donucii. Sig+num Berengarii Donucii.&nbsp; Sig+num Arberto Bernardi.&nbsp; Sig+num Berengarii, levite. Sig+num Berengario Reimundi.&nbsp; Sig+num Bernardi Bernardi.&nbsp; Sig+num Mironi, presbiteri, qui hec scripsit, cum litteras rasas in linea V, die et anno quod supra.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Sale to the count and countess of the town of Capraria by Ermessind, sister of Miro Giribert, who had previously sold it to the countess, stating that his sister had forfeited her claim &nbsp;(see #334, <em>Epistolae,</em> 25587.html).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>LFM 1.357-58, #336.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1067, January 25