---
letter_id: "25581"
title: "A letter from Raymond Berengar"
ititle: "a letter from raymond berengar"
ltr_date: "1063, July 5"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-10-13"
modified: "2015-10-13"
url: "/letter/25581.html"
senders:
  - id: 25531
    name: Raymond Berengar I
    iname: raymond berengar i
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25529
    name: Almodis of La Marche
    iname: almodis of la marche
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of Christ.&nbsp; I Raymond, by the grace of God count of Barcelona and marquis, and the donor to you, Almodis, by the grace of God countess.&nbsp; By this document of donation, I, said count Raymond give you, said Almodis, the town of Piera (Apiera), called by another name, Fontaned.&nbsp; This said town is in the county of Barcelona.&nbsp; And that town with all its territory, that is lands, vineyards, trellises, homes with all their buildings, trees of different kinds, woods, barren lands, meadows, pastures, waters, mills with all their building and water-courses, banks, torrents, fountains, stones, cultivated and desert, and [also] within the boundary of said town are St. Mary and St. Christopher and Holy Cross and St. James with all with all their tithes and firstfruits and offerings of the faithful and their buildings.&nbsp; And said town with its whole territory came to me, said [Raymond] count through the exchange which Udalard, viscount of Barcelona and his wife Guisla, viscountess, made with me by whatever right. And said town [of Piera] and Fontaned [by other name] abuts and is bound:&nbsp; in the east by the territories of castle Apierola and Macceffa, and the territory of said town Piera and Fontaned abuts and is bound in the south by the boundaries of the towns of Gelida and Munistrol and Subirads, and the territory of said town Piera and Fontaned abuts and is bound in the west by the boundaries of the towns Vid and Chapraria and Castelet, and the territory of said town Piera and Fontaned abuts and is bound in the north by the boundaries of the towns of Claro Monte and Odulini.&nbsp; Moreover, I said count Raymond give you, said countess Almodis the castle called Castelet with all its building[s] and boundaries and appurtenances.&nbsp; And said Castelet abuts and is bound in the east by the territory of said Piera, and the territory of said Castelet abuts and is bound in the south in the territory of said Piera, in the west it abuts and is bound by the territory of the town Chapraria, in the north it is bound by the territory of Claro Monte.&nbsp; As the said two towns are included and contained, with all their buildings and boundaries and appurtenances within the four aforesaid abutments and boundaries, I said count Raymond give to you, said countess Almodis, all said things as your own allod, and by my right I hand over said things into your control and power to do what you will.&nbsp; If I the donor should try to break the present donation, I could not get what I sought, but would pay all the said things doubly to you, said countess.&nbsp; If another man or woman should try [to break] the present donation, he/she would similarly pay all the aforesaid to you doubly; and afterwards this donation would be firm for all time.&nbsp; This document of donation was made on the 3rd ides of July in the 3rd year of the reign of king Philip. I count Raymond made this donation and signed the present document with my own name and asked witnesses to sign.&nbsp; +Berengar, bishop.&nbsp; +Sign of Bernard Amato.&nbsp; +Sign of Berengar Ermengald.&nbsp; +Sign of Raymond Sancio.&nbsp; +Sign of Dalmacio Guitard.&nbsp; +Sign of Ramball William.&nbsp; Guitard, deacon and judge.&nbsp; +SIgn of Udalard, viscount.&nbsp; +Sign of Bernard Raymond.&nbsp; +Sign of Eribal Riculf.&nbsp; Udalard, viscount. +Sign of Arnal Raymond.&nbsp; +Sign of Geribert Guitard.&nbsp; +Sign of Guadald William.&nbsp; +Sign of William Miro.&nbsp; +Sign of Guila, viscountess.&nbsp; +Sign of Raymond Amato.&nbsp; +Sign of Geribert Quirico.&nbsp; +Sign of Vivian, deacon, who wrote this on the day and year above.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Cristi nomine. Ego Reimundus, gracia Dei comes Barchinonensis ac marchio, donator sum tibi, Almodi, gracia Dei comitisse. Per hanc scripturam donacionis ego prescriptus comes Remundus dono tibi, prescripte Almodi, castrum Apiariam vocatum et altero nomine Fontaned vocitatum. Est, autem, predictum castrum in comitatu Barchinonensi. Et idem castrum cum toto suo termino, [id] sunt, terre, vinee, trilie, domus cum omnibus earum edificiis, arboris diversi generis, silve, garrice, pra(t)ti, pasqua, aque, molendina cum omnibus earum edificiis et discursibus aquosis, ripe, torrentes, fontes, petre, cultum et eremus, et sunt [hec?] in termino predicti castri Sancte Marie et Sancti Christofori et Sancte Crucis et Sancti Iacobi cum omnibus earum decimis et primiciis et oblacionibus fidelium et edificiis earum. Et advenit mihi, predicto [Reimundo], comiti, predictum castrum [cum] toto suo termino per co[mut]acionem quam fecit mihi Udalardus, vicecomes Barchinonensis, et uxor eius Guisla, vicecomitissa, et per quamcunque vocem. Et predictum castrum [de Apiar]ia et Fontaned [nomine alio?] affrontat et terminatur: de parte orientis in terminis castelli Apierole et de Macceffa, et affrontat et terminatur terminus predicti castri Apiarie et Fontaned de meridiie in terminis chastri Gelide et de Munistrol et de Subirads, et affrontat et terminatur terminus predicte Apiarie et Fontaned de occiduo in terminis de chastro Vid et Chaprarie et in terminis de Castelet, et affrontat et terminatur terminus predicte Apiarie et Fontaned de circio in terminis chastri Clari Montis et in terminis Chastri Odulini. Preterea, ego predictus comes Remundus dono tibi, predicte Almodi, comitisse, castellum vocatum Castelet cum omni suo edificio et terminis et pertinenciis eius. Et predictum Castelet affrontat et terminatur de parte orientis in termino Apiarie iam dicte, et affrontat et terminatur terminus predicti Castelet de meridie in terminio predicte Apiarie, de occiduo affrontat et terminatur in termino castri Chaprarie, de circio terminatur in termino chastri Clari Montis. Sicut concluduntur et continentur predicta duo chastra, cum omnibus eorum edificiis et terminis et pertinenciis omnibus intra quatuor predictas affrontaciones et terminos, ego predictus comes Remundus, sic dono tibi, predicte Almodi, comitisse, predictas res omnes ad tuum proprium alodium, et de meo iure predictas res in tuum trado directum et potestatem ad faciendum ex eis quod volueris. Quod si ego donator venero irrumpere presentem donacionem, non valeam vendicare quod requisiero, sed componam in duplo predictas omnes res tibi, predicte comitisse. Quod si alius homo vel femina venerit contra presentem donacionem, similiter componat predicta omnia tibi in duplo; et postea firma sit hec donacio omni tempore. Facta scriptura donacionas iii idus iulii anno iii&nbsp; in regni Philipi, regis. Reimundus, comes qui hanc donacionem feci et presentem scripturam proprio nomine firmavi et testes firmare rogavi. Berengarius, episcopus. Sig+num Bernardus Amati. Sig+num Berengarius Ermengaudi. Sig+num Remun­dus Sancii. Sig+num Dalmacius Guitardi. Sig+num Reamballus Guilielmi. Guitardus, levita et iudex. Sig+num Udalardus, vicecomes. Sig+num Bernardus Remundi. Sig+num Eribal Riculf. Udalardus, vi­cecomes. Beroiardus Remundi. Sig+num Eribal Riculf. Udalardus, vicecomes. Sig+num Arnal Remundi. Sig+num Geribertus Guitardi. Sig+num Guadaldus Guilielmus. Sig+num Guilielmus Mironi. Sig+num Guila, vicecomitissa. Sig+num Remundus Amati. Sig+num Geri­bertus Quirici. Sig+num Vivani, levite, qui hoc scripsi die et anno quo supra.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Raymond transfers to Almodis the town he had received by exchange with viscount Udalard and his wife (#325).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>LFM 1.348-49, #326.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1063, July 5