---
letter_id: "25620"
title: "A letter from Ermengol, count of Urgell"
ititle: "a letter from ermengol, count of urgell"
ltr_date: "1086, January 22"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-12-19"
modified: "2021-04-21"
url: "/letter/25620.html"
senders:
  - id: 25621
    name: Adelaide, countess of Urgell
    iname: adelaide, countess of urgell
    type: people
  - id: 25617
    name: Ermengol, count of Urgell
    iname: ermengol, count of urgell
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>So may this donation be valid like a purchase.&nbsp; A donation, indeed, which is done willingly, should just like a purchase have full strength, since a thing given which was handed over in person may in no way be sought again by the donor.&nbsp; Therefore, in the name of God, I Ermengol, count of Urgell, and my wife by name Adaleide, it pleased our spirits and continues to please them that by this document we make donation to you, count Raymond, and your wife by name Valencia, of that township (<i>villa</i>) of Lliminiana with its <i>castra</i> and appurtenances and adjacents’ revenue, stones moveable and immoveable, meadows, very rich pastures, sources, fountains, undeveloped lands, ducts, viaducts, cultivated and uncultivated lands, barren and developed, where you might find them, so we make by this charter of donation to you as your own and fullest allod, to you Raymond, count, and your wife by name Valencia, for your posterity to do as you will.&nbsp; And this township of Lliminiana, with those said <i>castra</i>, boundaries and abutments has:&nbsp; in the east up to the boundaries of Tolon and Mount Lauro, in the west to the river Nogera, in the south to Portella at the boundary of the Rubios, and&nbsp; in the north up to the bank of Gaveto and the boundary of Concas.&nbsp; However these boundaries surround and encircle, so we make this charter to you (and to you) completely and to your posterity which you &nbsp;decide on and pass on to; and by whatever rights it came to me, so we give you completely without any reservation to do your will.&nbsp; And I count Ermengol and my wife Adaleide, by our right hand over into your rule and power, count Raymond, and countess Valencia, and your posterity to do whatever you will according to your will, and that is clear.&nbsp; And if I, count Ermengol or my wife Adaleide or my posterity or any man or woman should wish to oppose this charter of donation to break it or disturb it, he could not prevail and would pay double; and henceforth this charter would remain firm and stable now and for all time.&nbsp; This charter of donation was done in the month of January, 11 kalends of February, in the 26th year of the reign of king Philip.&nbsp; Sign+ of count Ermengol.&nbsp; Sign+ of Adelaide, countess, who asked that this charter or page be written and that witnesses sign it, and they made their signs.&nbsp; Sign+ of Arnau Peter of Pons. Sign+ of Gaucerand Richard. Sign+ of William Arnau.&nbsp; Sign+ of Mir Guirreta. Sign+ of Arnau Bernard. Sign of Peter Bertrand.&nbsp; These knights are witnesses, and there are several who saw and heard.&nbsp; Peter, deacon, wrote it as asked on the day and year above.&nbsp; Count+ Ermengol.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext21">Ut ita valeat donacio sicut et empcio. Donacio, vero, qui per volumptatem facta fuerit, talem quale empcio, plenam habeat roborem, quia res donata qui in presencia tradita fuerit, nullo modo repetatur ad donatore. Igitur, in Dei nomine, ego Ermengaudus, comes Urgellensis, et coniux mea nomine Adaleiz, placuit in animis nostris et placet ut per hanc scriptura donacionis facimus vobis carta ad te, Reimundo comite, et coniux tua nomine Valencia, de ipsa villa de Liminiana cum suis castris et pertinenciis et de ipsos Castellones cum suis terminis et pertinenciis et agecenciis earum, petras mobiles et inmobiles, pratis, pascuis uberrimis, fontis, fontanulis, garricis, ductis, viamductis, cultum et incultum, eremis atque condirectis, ubi inve[ni]re potueritis, sic facimus vobis carta et donacione ad vestrum proprium et plenissimum alode ad te, Raimundo comite, et coniux tua nomine Valencia, ad vestra posterita ad faciendum vestram volumptatem. Et habet ipsa villa de Liminiana, cum ipsos castros iam dictos, terminos et affrontationes: de oriente usque in termino de Tolone et de Monte Lauro, de occidente usque in flumen Nogera, de meridie usque ad ipsa Portella ad termine de ipsos Rubios, et de aquilone usque ad ipso rivo de Gaveto et usque ad ipso termine de Concas. Quomodo isti termini ambiunt et circumveniunt, sic facimus vobis carta ab integrum ad te (et ad te) et ad tua posterita que tu dubitaveris aut dimiseris; et per qualisquelibet voces mihi advenit, sic donamus vobis ab inte­grum sine ulla reservacione ad faciendam vestram volumptatem. Et ego Ermengaudo comite et coniux mea, Adaleiz de nostro iure in vestro tradimus dominio et potestate de te, Raimundo comite, et Valencia comitissa et ad vestra posterita ad quecumque volueritis facere ad vestra voluntate, et est manifestum. Quod, si ego (si ego) Ermengaudus comes aut coniux mea Adaleiz aut mea posterita aut nullus omo vel femina qui ista carta donacionis venerit pro inrumpendum aut inquietare voluerit, non hoc valeat vindicare et in duplo componat; et in antea ista carta firmis et instabilis permaneat modo vel omnique tempore. Facta ista carta donacionis in mense ianuario, xi kal. februarias anno xxvi regnante Philippo rege. Sig+num Ermengaudo comite. Sig+num Adaleiz comitissa qui ista carta vel pagina rogaverit scribere et testes firmare, aut suas signas facerent. Sig+num Arnal Pere de Ponts. Sig+num Gaucerandus Ricardi. Sig+num Guillelm Arnal. Sig+num Mir Guirreta. Sig+ num Arnal Bernard. Signum Petro Bertrandi. Isti milites testes sunt, visores et auditores, pluraliter sunt hoc. Petrus levita rogitus scripsit sub die [et] anno quo supra. Ermengaudus, comes +.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Donation by Ermengol, count of Urgell and his wife Adelaide to the count and countess of Pallars, of the township of Lliminiana as allod with its <i>castra</i> and castles.&nbsp; A <i>castrum</i> is an administrative district including a castle, a fortification.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior 1.71-72, #55.</i></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1086, January 22