---
letter_id: "25626"
title: "A letter to Raymond Peter (Ramon Pere)"
ititle: "a letter to raymond peter (ramon pere)"
ltr_date: "1076, July 12"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-12-19"
modified: "2015-12-19"
url: "/letter/25626.html"
senders:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
    url: /people/25618.html
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25615.html
receivers:
  - id: 25625
    name: Raymond Peter (Ramon Pere)
    iname: raymond peter (ramon pere)
    type: people
    url: /people/25625.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of God.&nbsp; This is the agreement which count Raymond and his wife countess Valencia made with Raymond Peter.&nbsp; They, said count and said countess, give to said Raymond the <i>castrum</i> of Mur in fief, and commend to him the castellans who now hold that said <i>castrum</i>.&nbsp; And if there should be in whatever way an opening* among those castellans who today hold said <i>castrum</i>, other castellans who will be there, should be there at the will and order of said count and countess for all time, and on every occasion that said count and countess wished and requested.&nbsp; Said Raymond agreed that he would give them power over said <i>castrum</i> and observe fidelity to them according to the will of said count and countess and, after their death.&nbsp; Said Raymond agreed that he would similarly hold and keep this agreement and power and fidelity to their son Peter or, if Peter died, to the man or men or woman whom the count and countess designated and passed said castle on to in the same way he does in this agreement and agrees to those his said lords in faith, without any deception.&nbsp;&nbsp; This is enacted on the 4th ides of July in the 16th year of king Philip.&nbsp; Sign+ of count Raymond. Sign+ of countess Valencia.&nbsp; Sign+ of Raymond Peter, we who had this agreement done and signed by witnesses.&nbsp; Sign+ of Raymond Giribert. Sign+ of Ugo Mir.&nbsp; Sign+ of Amato Mir.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext31">In Dei nomine. Hec est conveniencia que faciunt Raimundus comes et uxor eius Valencia comitissa aput Raimundo Petro. Donant, namque, iam dictus comes et predicta comitissa ad supradicto Raimundo ipso castro de Muro per fevum, et comandant ad illum ipsos castellanos qui tenent modo ipso predicto castro. Et si per que[m]cumque modum venit inobertura de ipsos castellanos qui hodie tenent iam dicto castro alteros castellanos, que ibi erunt, sint ibi ad volumptatem et mandamentum omni tempore de predicto comite et comitissa, et per omnes vices quas voluerint et requisierint comes et comitissa predicti. Convenit ad eos Raimundus predictus quod donet eis potestatem de supradicto castro, et faciat ad illos fidelitatem secundum eorum volumptatem, et, post obitum eius, de comes et comitissa predictos. Convenit eis prefatus Raimundus quod similiter teneat et attendat ista conveniencia et de potestatem et de fidelitatem ad filio eius Petro, aut, si Petrus obierit, ad ipsum aut ad ipsos vel ad ipsam cui comes et comitissa dimiserint et dubitaverint predicto castro, eo modo sicut in ista conveniencia facit et convenit ad istos iam dictos suos seniores per fidem, sine ullo enganno. Actum est hoc IIII idus iulii anno xvi regis Philipi. Sig+num Raimundus comes. Sig+num Valencia comitissa. Sig+num Raimundus Petrus, qui hanc convenienciam fecimus et ad testibus firmare fecimus. Sig+ num Raimundus Giriberto. Sig+num Ugo Miro. Sig+num Amato Miro.<span></span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Agreement between the count and countess of Pallars and Raymond Petergiving him the <i>castrum</i> of Mur in fief.&nbsp; A <i>castrum</i> is an administrative district including a castle, a fortification.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>*A position is open when the relationship between the fief and the holder is broken, see Kosto, 90.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior, </i>&nbsp;&nbsp;1.76-77, #61.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1076, July 12