---
letter_id: "25622"
title: "A letter from Ermengol, count of Urgell"
ititle: "a letter from ermengol, count of urgell"
ltr_date: "1086, January 23"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-12-19"
modified: "2015-12-19"
url: "/letter/25622.html"
senders:
  - id: 25621
    name: Adelaide, countess of Urgell
    iname: adelaide, countess of urgell
    type: people
  - id: 25617
    name: Ermengol, count of Urgell
    iname: ermengol, count of urgell
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>So may the donation be valid like a purchase.&nbsp; Indeed a donation which is done willingly, should just like a purchase, have full strength, since when a thing given is handed over in person, it may in no way be sought again by the donor.&nbsp; In the name of God.&nbsp; I count Ermengol and my wife Adelaide, it pleased our spirit that we make this document of donation to you, count Raymond, and your wife by name Valencia, of the <i>castrum </i>which is in the county of Pallars, named Tenriu, with that township and all its boundaries and appurtenances and adjacents’ revenues, as your proper allod to you and your posterity to do as you will.&nbsp; And if I count Ermengol or my wife or my posterity or any man should wish to disturb this charter of donation, he would pay double and it would not be disrupted.&nbsp; This charter of donation was made in the month of January, 10 kalends of February in the 26th year of the reign of king Philip.&nbsp; Sign+ of Ermengol, count.&nbsp; Sign+ of Adelaide, countess, who asked that this charter of donation be written and witnesses to sign and made their signs.&nbsp; Sign+ of Arnau Peter of Pontes.&nbsp; Sign+ of Goceran Richard.&nbsp; Sign+ of William Arnau.&nbsp; Sign+ of Mir Guirreta.&nbsp; Sign+ of Peter Raymond of Eril.&nbsp; Sign+ of Raymond Guiribert.&nbsp; These are the witnesses.&nbsp; Peter, deacon, wrote this as asked on the day and year above.&nbsp; Count Ermengol+.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Ut ita valeat donacio sicut et empcio. Donacio, vero, qui per voluntate facta fuerit, talem qualem empcio, plenam habeat roborem, quia res donata qui in presencia tradita fuerit, nullo modo repetatur ad donare. In Dei nomine. Ego Ermengaudus comes et coniux mea Adaleiz placuit in animis nostris ut per hanc scriptura donacionis facimus vobis carta ad te, Raimundo comite, et coniux tua nomine Valencia, de castro qui est in comitatu Paliarense prenominato Tenriu, cum ipsa villa et cum suis terminis et pertinenciis et agecenceis earum, ad proprium alode ad vobis at ad vestra posterita ad faciendam vestra volumptate. Quod si ego Ermengaudus comes aut coniux mea aut mea posterita aut aliquis homo, qui ista carta donacionis inquietare voluerit, in duplo componat et non disrumpatur. Facta ista carta donacionis in mense ianuario, x kal. februarii anno xxvi regnante Philippo rege. Sig+num Ermengaudo comite. Sig+num Adaleiz comitissa, qui ista carta donacionis rogavit scribere et testes firmare et suas signas facerent. Sig+num Arnal Petro de Pontes. Sig+num Goceran Ricard. Sig+num Guillelm Arnall. Sig+num Miro Guirreta. Sig+num Petro Ramon de Eril. Sig+num Ramon Guiribert. Testes hoc sunt. Petrus levita rogitus scripsit sub die et anno quo supra. Ermengaudus, comes +.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Charter of donation by Ermengol and Adelaide to the count and countess of Pallars of the <em>castrum</em> of Tenriu. &nbsp;A <i>castrum</i> is an administrative district including a castle, a fortification.</p><p><i></i></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior, </i>&nbsp;1.72, #56.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1086, January 23