---
letter_id: "25628"
title: "A letter to Raymond Mir"
ititle: "a letter to raymond mir"
ltr_date: "1056-57, July."
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-12-19"
modified: "2021-04-21"
url: "/letter/25628.html"
senders:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 25627
    name: Raymond Mir
    iname: raymond mir
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of God.&nbsp; This is the agreement made between lord Raymond, count by the grace of God, and his wife, lady Valencia, countess by the grace of God, with lord Raymond Mir and his wife Maria on the <i>castrum</i> of Orchau.&nbsp; Said Raymond, by grace of God count, and his wife countess Valencia agreed also that they would not demand power over that <em>castrum</em> of Orchau from said lord Raymond and his wife Maria, in his lifetime, not they nor they children, from them or their children.&nbsp; And if lord Raymond, count by the grace of God, or his wife countess Valencia or his son demanded power over said <i>castrum</i> of Orchau from lord Raymond Miro or his wife Maria or their children, they would not yield that power unless there was a judment by law against them for a crime committed in an assembly of barons, men who could not or would not make amends for them.&nbsp; This was done.&nbsp; The agreement was made in the month of July, in the 26th year of the reign of king Henry.&nbsp; Sign+ of Raymond, count by the grace of God.&nbsp; Sign+ of countess Valencia, we who asked this agreement be written and signed by witnesses.&nbsp; Sign+ of Bernard, viscount.&nbsp; Sign+ of Mir Mironi. Sign+ of Alaman Altemir. Sign+ of Folc Guillem. Sign of Arnau of Ac de Eresuz.&nbsp; Sign+ of Guitard Isarn of Valle Ferrera.&nbsp; Sign+ of Baron Ato.&nbsp; Sign+ of Guido Ato.&nbsp; Those who saw and heard:&nbsp; Arnau Renard and Compang Isarn and Remon Peter and Isnard Mir and Gombal Arnau and Bernard Raymond and Eriman Garsia and Isarn Salla of Basturz and other men of rank who were there.&nbsp; Arnald, priest, wrote this as asked on the day and year above.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext21">In Dei nomine. Hec est conveniencia facta, que facit domino Raimundo, gracia Dei comite, et coniux eius domna Valencia, gracia Dei comitissa, ad domno Ramundo Mironi et ad coniux eius Maria de ipsum kastrum de Orchall. Convenit eciam iam dictus Raimundus, gracia Dei comite, et coniux eius Valencia comitissa ad domno Raimundo supradicto et ad coniux eius Maria, que non demandent eis potestatem de ipsum kastrum de Orchallo per vita sua, nec illis, nec filiis eius, nec ad illos, nec ad filios eorum. Et, si domnus Raimundus, gracia Dei comes, aut coniux eius Valencia comitissa aud filius eius demandent eis potestatem ad domno Raimundo Mironi aut ad coniux eius Maria aut ad filiis suis de ipso kastro de Orchallo, non donent eis potestatem, si non erat per tale forasfactura facta iudicata fuisset per directum, in placitos de barones homines que illis emendare non potuissent aut non voluissent. Quod est (h)acta. Facta ista conveniencia in mense iulio, anno xxvi regnantem regis Enrici. Sig+num Raimundo, gracia Dei comite. Sig+num Valenzia comitissa, que ista conveniencia rogavimus scribere et tes­tes firmare. Sig+num Bern(n)ard, vicecomite. Sig+num Mir Mironi. Sig+num Alaman Altemir. Sig+num Folconi Guillielmo. Sig+num Arnall d Ac de Eresuz. Sig+num Guitard Isarn de Valle Ferrera. Sig+num Baroni Atoni. Sig+num Guido Atoni. Visores et auditores: Ar(n)nall Renard et Compang Isarnno et Remon Petro et Isnard Mironi et Gomball Arnnall et Bernard Raimon et Eriman Garsia et Isarn Salla de Basturz et aliorum honorum hominum qui ibidem aderant. Arn(n)aldus sacerdos rogatus hoc scripsit et die et anno que supra.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Agreement between the count and countess of Pallars and Raymond Mir and his wife on the <i>castrum</i> of Orcau, in which they would not give demand power over it unless he had committed a crime. &nbsp;A <i>castrum</i> is an administrative district including a castle, a fortification.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior, </i>&nbsp;&nbsp;1.77-78, #63.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1056-57, July.