---
letter_id: "25633"
title: "A letter from Tedball Raymond"
ititle: "a letter from tedball raymond"
ltr_date: "1088?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-12-19"
modified: "2015-12-19"
url: "/letter/25633.html"
senders:
  - id: 25631
    name: Tedball Raymond
    iname: tedball raymond
    type: people
    url: /people/25631.html
receivers:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
    url: /people/25618.html
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25615.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>This is the judgment of the agreement that was made between count Raymond and countess Valencia and Tedbal over the castle (<i>castello</i>) of Orcau.&nbsp; If Tedbal can prove that said count and countess made with him, as he shows, the document about their&nbsp; power over Orcau by willing spirit, freely without force, and said count and countess could not overturn this through one knight and that knight of theirs will have been conquered, said castle with its appurtenances is Tedball’s.&nbsp;&nbsp; If, however, Tedball’s knight is conquered, that same Tedball similarly determines that castle with its appurtenances goes to the count and countess.&nbsp; If, however, Tedball could not prove this, &nbsp;said count and countess may make themselves good on the oath of one knight that they did not make that document with willing spirits, freely without force.&nbsp; And if said Tedball could not overturn this by one knight and his knight were conquered, that would decide said castle with its appurtenances &nbsp;for the count and countess.&nbsp; And if the count’s knight were conquered, he and the countess would determine that castle with its appurtenances for Tedball; and this is done by both sides without fraud.</p><p>Similarly, however, if Tedball can prove that one that day when the count and countess made that document, they had power without deception over said castle, and the count and countess could not overturn this through a knight and their knight was conquered, it would decide said castle to Tedball. And if the knight of Tedball were conquered, it would decide that castle to the count and countess, and if Tedball cannot prove this, said count and countess may offer an oath through one knight that they did not have power over said castle without deception on that day when the document was made.&nbsp; And if Tedball cannot overturn this and his knight is conquered, that would decide said castle to said count and countess.&nbsp; And if the knight of the count and countess were conquered, that would decide said castle to said Tedball, except for comital signory.&nbsp; And this was done and signed on each side without deception.</p><p>From all these oaths, however, by one deed and conquest, the decision about said castle and the surety made to that party that could acquire it by this judgment and those in whose power this will have been done may hold that castle effectively; and moreover it would be well confirmed to them that they could bring this to full effect.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Iudicium placiti quod actum est inter Reimundum comitem et Valenciam comitissam et Tedballum de castello Orcalli sic est. Si Tedballus potest probare quod iam dictus comes et comitissa fecissent sibi ipsam, quam ostendet, scripturam de potestate Orcalli eorum libentibus animis, gratis sine forcia, et supradictus comes et comitissa non potuerint hoc tornare per unum militem, et fuerit inde victus miles eorum, diffiniat iam dictum castellum cum pertinenciis suis eidem Tedballo. Si, autem, miles Thedballi fuerit inde victus, idem Thedballus similiter difiniat ipsum castellum cum pertinenciis eius eidem comiti et comitisse. Si, autem, Thedballus non potuerit hoc probare, prope dictus comes et comitissa espient se per sacramentum unius militis quod non fecissent ipsam scrip­turam libentibus animis, gratis [sine] forcia. Et, si dictus Thedballus non poterit hoc tornare per unum militem et fuerit victus miles eius, diffiniat supradictum castellum cum pertinenciis suis dicto comiti et comitisse. Et, si miles comiti fuerit victus, diffiniat ipse et comitissa ipsum castellum cum pertinenciis suis eidem Thedballo; et hoc sic fac­tum ab utraque parte sine fraude.</p><p class="Bodytext21">Similiter autem, si Theballus potest probare quod ipsa die, quando fecerunt ipsam scripturam comes et comitissa, habebant potestatem sine enganno de iam dicto castello, et comes et comitissa non potuerint hoc tornare per militem et fuerit inde victus miles eorum, diffiniat iam dictum castellum eidem Thedballo. Et, si miles Thedballi fuerit victus, diffiniat ipsum castellum eidem comiti et comitisse, et, si Theballus non potest hoc probare, sepedictus comes et comitissa prebeant sacra­mentum per unum militem quod non habebant potestatem de dicto cas­tello sine enganno ipsa die quando fecerit ipsam scripturam. Et, si Theballus non potest hoc tornare et fuit inde victus miles eius, diffiniat sepedictum castellum prope dicto comiti et comitisse. Et, si miles comitis et comitisse fuerit inde victus, diffiniant sepedictum castellum supradicto Theballo, exceptus comitali senioratu. Et hoc sit factum et firmatum ex utraque parte sine enganno.</p><p>De his, autem, omnibus sacramentis, uno facto et victo, sit de supra­dicto castello diffinicio et securitas facta ipsi parti que potuerit conquirere eum per hoc judicium, et ipsi, in quorum potestate hoc erit factum, teneant potencialiter ipsum castellum; et insuper sit illis bene firmatum ut possint hoc perducere ad plenum effectum.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Judgment made on the agreement between the count and countess of Pallars and Tedball on power over Orcau to be settled by judicial combat.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior,</i> 1.83-84, #68.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1088?