---
letter_id: "25642"
title: "A letter from Sunyer Raymond"
ititle: "a letter from sunyer raymond"
ltr_date: "1077, January 28."
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-12-19"
modified: "2016-09-23"
url: "/letter/25642.html"
senders:
  - id: 25640
    name: Sunyer Raymond
    iname: sunyer raymond
    type: people
    url: /people/25640.html
receivers:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
    url: /people/25618.html
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25615.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of God.&nbsp; I Sunyer Ramon make to you,count Rayond and your wife countess Valencia.&nbsp; Through this document of mine, I make this charter to you [vobis] for the <i>castro</i> Montaniana and all its boundaries and appurtenaces, barren and developed, and the <i>castrum</i> Castello Sancto with all its boundaries and appurtenaces, barren and developed. &nbsp;And all this is in the county of Pallars.&nbsp; And the <i>castro</i> of Montaniana abuts:&nbsp; in the east the boundaries of Castello Sancto, in the south of Girueta to the via campo, in the west the boundaries of Lozares, and north the boundaries of mount Mesoa and Arinno.&nbsp; And the <i>castro</i> of Castello Sancto abuts:&nbsp; in the east the boundaries of Eroles or Erbul, in the south, of Girueta, in the west of Montaniana, and in the north of Espillos.&nbsp; As much as these abutments enclose and these boundaries encircle, I give over and determine and quitclaim and make this charter to you for said castles and towns and hills and cliffs, developed and barren, with all the authority that my father gave me in them, and all the rights which I have there and ought to have in whatever way, so that I will not seek further from you from this hour, not from you or your sons or daughters, or those male or female whom you [vos] will designate or pass it on to; but this will always remain your own fullest allod to do what you wish.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And for this, we give you [<i>tibi</i>] in amendment that valley of Escos with its boundaries and appurtenances, as is manifest.&nbsp; And if I, Sunyer, or any man or woman might wish to disturb this charter, we could not prevail, but would pay you double with all improvements; and henceforth this charter will remain firm and I give it from my jurisdiction to your [vestro] rule and power.&nbsp; Which was enacted 5th kalends of February in the 17th year of king Philip.&nbsp; Sign+ of Sunyer Ramon, who ordered this charter to be written in my presence and I signed it with my own hands and asked it to be signed.&nbsp; Sign+ of Bertrand Ato. Sign+ of Arnau Bernard. Sign+ of Raymond Peter. Raymond, cleric.&nbsp; William, priest, wrote it as asked on the day and year above.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Dei nomine. Ego Suneario Raimundo facio tibi, Raimundo comite, et coniuge tue Valencie comitisse. Per hanc mee scripture facio, namque, vobis cartam de castro Montaniana et de suis omnibus terminis et pertinenciis, eremis et condirectis, et de castrum Castello Sancto cum omnibus suis terminis et pertinenciis cunctis eremis atque condirectis. Et est hec omnia in comitatu Paliarense. Et habet affrontaciones ipso castro de Montaniana: a parte orientis in terminos de Castello Sancto, et de meridie in terminos de Girueta sive ad de via campo, et de occiduo in terminos de Lozares, et de aquilone in terminos de monte Mesoa atque et de Arinno. Et ipso castro de Castello Sancto affrontat; a parte orientis in terminos de Eroles sive et de Erbul, et de meridie in terminos de Girueta, et de occiduo in terminos de Montaniana, et de aquilone in terminos de Espillos. Quantum inter istas affrontaciones includunt et isti termini circumeunt, sic dimitto et definio et exvacuo et cartam vobis facio de supradictis castellis et villas et puios et rochas, condirectos et eremos, de omnes voces quod pater meus in eis michi dimisit, et de cunctis directis quos ibi habeo et per quecumque modum habere debeo, ut amplius ex hac hora vobis non requiram nec ad vos nec ad filios vestros vel filias, ad illos aut ad illas cui vos eos dubitaveritis vel dimiseritis; sed semper permaneat hoc ad vestrum plenissimum proprium alodium facere quod vultis velle. Et propter hoc damus tibi emenda ipsam vallem de Escos cum suis terminis et pertinenciis, et est manifestum. Quod si ego Su­neario aut ullus homo vel femina qui hanc cartam inquietare voluerit, non hoc valeat vindicare, sed componat vobis in duplo cum omni sua melioracione; et in antea ista carta maneat firma et de meo iure in vestro trado dominio et potestate. Que est acta v kal. febroarii anno xvii regis Philippi. Sig+num Suneario Raimundo, qui hanc cartam, me presente, scribere iussi et manibus propriis firmavi et firmare rogavi. Sig+num Bertrandi Atoni. Sig+num Arnalli Bernardi.&nbsp; Sig+num Raimundi Petri. Raimundus, clericus. Guilelmus sacerdos, rogitus scripsit et die et anno quod supra.</p><p class="Bodytext21">&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Charter of quitclaim which Sunyer Ramon, count Raymond’s brother, made to the count and countess for the <i>castra</i> of Montaniana and Castello Sancto; he receives from them the valley of Escos. A <i>castrum</i> is an administrative district including a castle, a fortification.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior,</i> 1.92, #78.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1077, January 28.