---
letter_id: "25651"
title: "A letter to Ermessend and her sons"
ititle: "a letter to ermessend and her sons"
ltr_date: "1055-98"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-12-19"
modified: "2015-12-19"
url: "/letter/25651.html"
senders:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 25650
    name: Ermessend
    iname: ermessend
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of God.&nbsp; This is the agreement that was made between count Raymond and countess Valencia [on one side] and Ermessend of Sancta Arada and her son[s] Oliver and William [on the other].&nbsp;&nbsp; It was agreed that count Raymond would hold the church of St. Mary of Sancta Arada in his protection within his honor against all men.&nbsp; And moreover they agreed that he would give Ermessend and her sons that church of St. Genesius in his honor.&nbsp; And count Raymond would give it to them in fief and by his hand in the way that his father Bernard held in fief and afterwards [gave] aid to retaining it against all men in faith without deception.</p><p>And from that <i>castrum </i>of St. Maurice, the receiving of &nbsp;6 quarts of barley and meat of 1 solidus and 11 round cakes and 4 ff. of wine; and from the <i>castrum </i>of Reguard, 1 measure of barley and 1 of oats and 1 <i>solidus</i> in meat and 50 round cakes&nbsp; and 5 ff. of wine; having received from Pug Mangones, 3 measures of grain, half of barley and half of oats, and 60 round cakes and 3 pigs, each of 4 argents’ worth, and 6 ff. of wine and from that hill of Orcau.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Dei nomine. Hec est conveniencia qui est facta infra Raimundo comiite et Valencia comitissa et Ermessendis Sancta Arada et Oliver, suo filio, et Guilelm. Convenit ad illos Raimundo comite quod teneat in sua baglia ipsa ecclesia de Sancha Maria de Sancta Arada apud sua honore contra totos homines. Et supra convenit illos que donet ad Ermessendis et ad istos suos filios ipsa ecclesia de Sancto Genesio apud sua honore. Et hoc donet illos Raimundo comite per feo et per sua manu in tali modo, quomodo Bernardus suo patre tenebat per feo, et postea adiutorium ad retinendi contra totos homines per fide, sine enganno.</p><p>Et de ipso castro de Sanctum Mauricii, recepto de VI quartas de ordio et carne de I solido et XI fogazas et IIII ff. de vino ; et de ipso castro de Reguard, modio I de ordio et modio I de avena et I solido in carne et L fogazas et V ff. de vino; recepto de Pug Mangones, III modios de civada, medietate de ordio et medietate de avena, et LX fogazas et III porcos, unusquisque de nil argenceos, et VI ff. de vino et de ipso pugo de Orcal.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Agreement between the count and countess and Ermessend of St. Arada and her sons on a church. A <i>castrum</i> is an administrative district including a castle, a fortification.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior,</i> &nbsp;1.111, #106.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1055-98