---
letter_id: "25663"
title: "A letter to Girbert and Udalard"
ititle: "a letter to girbert and udalard"
ltr_date: "1061-1108"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-12-20"
modified: "2021-12-14"
url: "/letter/25663.html"
senders:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 25662
    name: Girbert and Udalard
    iname: girbert and udalard
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of God.&nbsp; This is the agreement which count Raymond and countess Valencia made with the sons of Bernad Arnau, by name Girbert and Udalard.&nbsp; Count Raymond gives them 20 ounces of gold in real worth (?<i>rem valentem</i>); and Girbert and Udalard make peace with said count Raymond and countess Valencia and their sons over all the complaints which they had against them.&nbsp; And Girbert and Udalard put the <i>castrum</i> of Rivert into the care and protection of count Raymond and countess Valencia and their sons which they will hold in their protection against all men and women outside of count Artau and his men.&nbsp; And if the men of count Raymond had a complaint with Girbert and Udalard, that they would correct it by order of count Raymond from this hour forth; and if they had a complaint against the men of count Raymond, count Raymond would correct it.&nbsp; And count Raymond would similarly hold the allod of Estago with its boundaries in protection as another document holds.&nbsp; And what is written above, so count Raymond would hold in his protection against all men, outside of count Artau.&nbsp; And of his men who are higher than count Artau as written above of count Raymond, Girbert and Udalard would hold this agreement with count Raymond and his sons; and count Raymond and his sons would hold this agreement with Girbert and Udalard for all time on both sides.&nbsp; This agreement was enacted in the month of May, in a year of the reign of king Philip. Sign+ of count Raymond. Sign+ of Peter, his son. Sign+ of Girbert and Udalard, who had this agreement written and had witnesses sign it.&nbsp; Sign+ of Bonfilio. Sign+ of Ginaman. Sign+ of Bertran Bertran.&nbsp; They are witnesses.&nbsp; Raymond, priest, wrote this as asked on the day and year above.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Dei nomine. Hec est conveniencia que fecit Reimundo comite et Valencia comitissa apud suos filios de Bernad Arnal, nomine Girbert et Udalard. Donat ad eos Reimundo comite xx uncias de auro in rem valentem; et illi Girbert et Udalard faciunt finem ad predicto Reimundo comite et Valencia comitessa et ad filiis suis de totas illas querelas que habent de illos. Et mittent Girbert et Udalard ipso castro de Rivert in sua guarda et in sua baiulia de Reimundo comite et de Valencia comitessa at ad filiis suis que illi teneant in baiulia contra cunctos homines et femi­nas extra de Artallo comite et de suos homines. Et si habebant querelam suos homines de Reimundo comite de Girbert et de Udalard, que illi faciant directo per suo mandamento de Reimundo comite de ista hora in ante; et si illi habent querelam de suos homines de Reimundo co­mite, faciat ad eos directo comite Reimundo. Et illum alodem de Estago teneat Reimundo comite in baiulia similiter quomodo alium scriptum retinet cum suos terminos. Et hoc quod superius scriptum est, sic te­neant in baiulia Reimundo comite contra cunctos homines, extra Ar­tallo comite. Et de suos homines qui melius sunt de Artallo comite que de Reimundo comite quomodo superius scriptum est, si teneant Girbert et Udalard ista conveniencia ad Reimundo comite et ad suos filios; et Reimundo comite et sui filli teneant ista conveniencia ad Gir­bert et ad Udalard omnique tempore ex utraque parte. &lt;Acta&gt; conve­niencia in mense madio, agno regnante Philippo, rege. Sig+num Rei­mundo, comite. Sig+num Petro suo filio. Sig+num Girbert et Uda­lard, qui ista conveniencia fecerunt scribere et testes firmare. Sig+num Bonfilio. Sig+num Ginaman. Sig+num Bertran Bertran. Testes sunt. Raimundus, sacerdos, rogitus scripsit die et anno que supra.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Girbert and Udalard give <i>castrum</i> of Rivert with allod of Estago into the ward and protection of the count and countess. &nbsp;A <i>castrum</i> is an administrative district including a castle, a fortification.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Liber Feudorum Maior &nbsp;1.135-36, #135.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1061-1108