---
letter_id: "25661"
title: "A letter from Girbert Bertran and his mother"
ititle: "a letter from girbert bertran and his mother"
ltr_date: "1055-98"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2015-12-20"
modified: "2021-04-21"
url: "/letter/25661.html"
senders:
  - id: 25660
    name: Girbert Bertran
    iname: girbert bertran
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of God.&nbsp; This is the agreement which was made between count Raymond and countess Valencia and Girbert Bertran and his mother.&nbsp; Said Girbert and his mother agreed to said count Raymond and said countess, that they would have entry and exit in that <i>castrum</i> of Eramont and make war against all men or women with one afore-named right of lodging: 60 round cakes and 5 ff. of wine and 1 solidus in meat and 1 measure of barley and another of oats.&nbsp; And said Girbert agreed to said count Raymond that he would help him hold and defend that township of Eramont against all men or women and would help him hold and defend his other honors against all men.&nbsp; And after his death, said count Raymond would similarly hold and keep said agreement to the son to whom he left his county; and this would be done in righteous faith without deception.&nbsp; And count Raymond agreed to Girbert Bertran and his mother that he would be their lord correctly and hold them in his protection with that <i>castrum</i> of Eramont, and with all they have there, and with what they have in Erba Savina, that he would not take it or have it taken; and if anyone should take it, he would help them, in faith without deception. Sign+ of count Raymond. Sign+ of countess Valencia. Sign+ of Girbert Bertrand. Sign+ of Guiia. Sign+ of Peter Raymond of Mur.&nbsp; Sign+ of Raymond Girbert. Sign+ of Dod Arnau. Sign+ of Arnau William.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Dei nomine. Hec est conveniencia que facta est inter Reimundus comes et Valencia comitissa et Girbertus Bertrandi et mater eius. Con­venit predictus Girbertus et eius mater ad Reimundus iam dictus comes et prephata comitissa, que habeant in ipso castro de Eramont intrare et exire et guerreiare contra cunctos homines vel feminas et uno recepto prenominato: LX fogaces et V ff. de vino et I solidum in carne et I modium ordei et alium de avena. Et convenit predictus Girbertus ad iam dictus Raimundus comes que adiuvet ad illum tenere et defendere illa villa de Eramont contra cunctos homines vel feminas, et alia sua honore adiuvet ad illum tenere et defendere contra cunctos homines. Et post obitum, iam dictus Reimundus chomes similiter teneat et attendat prephata conveniencia ad illum filium qui suo comitatu dimiserit; et hoc sit factum per directa fide, sine engan. Et convenit Reimundus comes ad Girbertus Bertran et ad mater eius, que siat suo senior diercto (sic) et teneat illos in baiolia cum ipso castro de Eramont, et cum omnia que ibi habent, et cum hoc que habent in Erba Savina, que non tollat illos, nequa tollere faciat; et, si aliquis tulerit, adiuvet ad illos per fide, sine engan. Sig+num Reimundus, comes. Sig+num Valencia, comitissa. Sig+num Girbertus Bertrandi. Sig+num Guiia. Sig+num Petrus Reimundi de Mur. Sig+num Reimundus Girberti. Sig+num Dod Arnalli. Sig+num Arnallus Gui[l]elmi.</p><p class="Bodytext21">&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Agreement with Gerbert Bertran and his mother over the <i>castrum</i> of Eramonte. A <i>castrum</i> is an administrative district including a castle, a fortification.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Liber Feudorum Maior &nbsp;1.134, #133.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1055-98