---
letter_id: "25670"
title: "A letter to Raymond/Ramon, count of Barcelona"
ititle: "a letter to raymond/ramon, count of barcelona"
ltr_date: "1057, June 4"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-01-28"
modified: "2021-12-01"
url: "/letter/25670.html"
senders:
  - id: 25669
    name: Ermessenda of Carcassonne
    iname: ermessenda of carcassonne
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 25491
    name: Count Raymond Berenguer of Barcelona
    iname: count raymond berenguer of barcelona
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the omnipotent God and eternal King.&nbsp; I, Ermessenda, daughter of Adaleide, countess, am the seller and quitclaim and releaser to you, lord Raymond, count and marquis by the grace of God, and lady Almodis, countess by the favor of God.&nbsp; It is very well known and manifest to all men the truth of the thing to those who know what was written, that the county of Girona and the bishopric of Girona with all their boundaries, territories, and appurtenances, and the county of Barcelona and the bishopric of Barcelona with all their boundaries, territories, and appurtenances, and the county of Osona and Manresa and the see of Osona with all their boundaries, territories, and appurtenances, were the property of your grandfather, lord Raymond, count, my husband, who at his death left said counties and bishoprics to me by the document of his will for life, as long as I might live.&nbsp; Therefore, I said Ermessenda, since I know, acknowledge and affirm that said things were the property of your grandfather, said lord Raymond, and by paternal and grandpaternal relation and blood line, as inscribed above, ought more properly be yours, said count Raymond, grandson of that Raymond, than mine, therefore I sell, release and quitclaim to you, said lord Raymond, count, and lady Almodis, countess, said counties and bishoprics with all their boundaries, territories, and appurtenances, that is, I sell to you said county of Girona and bishopric of St. Mary, see of Girona, with all their boundaries, territories, and appurtenances, namely that city of Girona I sell with the <i>castrum</i> of Gironella and all its walls and towers and buildings with all the <i>castris </i>and comital castles and all the territories, and appurtenances&nbsp; that are in said county of Girona, with all their territories, and appurtenances, and all the abbeys that are in said county and bishopric, and with all other things and all their appurtenances and all hills and cliffs, developed and barren, which are in said county and with all other things that pertain to comital right.&nbsp; And similarly I, said Ermessenda, sell to you said county of Barcelona and the bishopric of Holy Cross and Saint Eulalia, see of Barcelona, with all their boundaries, territories, and appurtenances, which are in said county of Barcelona, and with all the hills and cliffs, developed and barren, which are in said county, and with all the comital domains with their appurtenances, boundaries and services, which are in said county of Barcelona and with all other things that pertain to comital right in said county.&nbsp; Similarly I, said Ermessenda, sell to you, said count and countess, the county of Osona and Manresa, given to me as marital fief (dower).&nbsp; Manresa county, I say, I sell to you and the bishopric of St. Peter, see of Vic, with all their boundaries, territories, and appurtenances, and with the ruined city which is called Manresa with all its buildings, territories, and appurtenances, and with all the <i>castris</i> and comital castles and their building, territories, and appurtenances, that are in said counties of Osona and Manresa and said brishopric of Osona, and with all the hills and cliffs, developed and barren, which are in said counties and bishopric, and with the comital domains, and all the appurtenances that are in said counties, and all other things that pertain to comital right in said counties.&nbsp; And all these came to me, said Ermessenda, by the testament of my said husband Raymond, as mentioned above, or by my tithe, or given to me as marital dower, and by certain determinations which I made with my son count Berenguer and whatever authorities.&nbsp; Moreover, I said Ermessenda, sell to you, said count and countess, that <i>castrum </i>of Begur with all its buildings, territories, and appurtenances,&nbsp; that came to me by testament and gift of Udalard Gauzfred and by whatever authorities.&nbsp; And in the county of Barcelona, I sell you, said count and countess, the <i>castrum</i> of Apierola with all its buildings, territories, and appurtenances and services, which came to my by purchase and by whatever authorities.&nbsp; Also I, said Ermessenda, sell to you, said count and countess, that <i>castrum</i> of Pontils with all its buildings, territories, and appurtenances.&nbsp; Besides all these I, said Ermessenda, sell to you, said count and countess, the <i>castrum</i> of Cardona with all its buildings, territories, and appurtenances,&nbsp; with all its voices and authorities which I have and ought to have in the county and bishopric of Urgell in whatever way and by whatever acquisition.&nbsp;</p><p>I, therefore, the aforenamed Ermessenda, sell, release, and quitclaim to you, said lord Raymond and lady Almodis, all the aforesaid with all their appurtenances, boundaries, and abutments, and with all others pertaining to comital power in all the above things, for the price of one thousand ounces of gold, in gold and silver, which you, said count and countess gave me, said Ermessenda, and I received from you; and this is manifest and known to all.&nbsp; And all my authorities in all said things, I, said Ermessenda, with firm and sincere faith sell and release and quitclaim to you, said count and countess, and I nullify them for the said price, so that from this day and time you, said count Raymond and countess Almodis, and your posterity, may possess all the aforenamed secure and tranquil in peace without reclaiming or opposition from me or any man or woman.&nbsp; At the end of this sale and release, I, frequently mentioned Ermessenda, release and quitclaim and nullify all my authorities over all said things to your posterity or the one to whom you leave all the aforesaid or anything in all the said letters or words.&nbsp; So that, if I, said Ermessenda, seller and releaser and quitclaimer, should move against the present sale and release and quitclaim to break it by whatever way and trick, I could not achieve what I sought, but must pay all the above triply to you, said count and countess or your posterity.&nbsp; And if another man or woman should move against the present sale and release and quitclaim, he/she would similarly pay all the aforesaid to you or your posterity; and afterward this sale and release and quitclaim would remain firm for all time.&nbsp; And if there are any things that are not written above by name which ought to pertain to me, said Ermessenda, in whatever way or by whatever authority within all the said counties and all the said bishoprics and within their boundaries, wherever they might be or could be known or found, I, said Ermessenda, similarly sell and release and quitclaim all these things added at the end for the said price to you, said count and countess and your posterity to whom you pass on the abovewritten or anything of all the above letters or words.&nbsp; So that if I, said Ermessend, should attempt to break this, I would be compelled to make triple payment to you and your posterity; and afterwards this would be firm for all time.&nbsp; And if any many or woman should move to break this addition, he/she would suffer similar penalty.&nbsp;<br>This sale and release and quitclaim was enacted on the second nones of June, in the 26th [year] of the reign of king Henry.&nbsp; Sign+ of Ermessenda, seller and quitclaimer, I who signed this sale and quitclaim and release in the present document with my own hand and asked witnesses to sign.&nbsp; +William, bishop of the church of Osona by the grace of God.&nbsp; Sign+ of Andrea, abbot.&nbsp; Sign+ of Amato Eldric.&nbsp; Udalard, viscount.&nbsp; + Berengar, abbot.&nbsp; Sign+ of Gerall, deacon and sacristan.&nbsp; Sign+ of Raymond Guifred.&nbsp; Sign+ of Miro, priest (presbiteri).&nbsp; Sign+ of William, deacon.&nbsp; Sign+ of Peter Gerald. Sign+ of Gaucelm Arnall.&nbsp; Sign+ of John, deacon.&nbsp; Sign+ of Guanalgaud of Albars. Sign+ of Udalgar.&nbsp; Peter, abbot.&nbsp; Sign+ of Berengar deacon. Sign+ of Mir, priest (sacerdotis). Sign+ of Pons, head of school/choir.&nbsp; Sign+ of Melemar, priest (sacerdotis). Sign+ of Ermemir, priest (presbiter). Sign+ of Adalbert Guitard. Sign+ of William Borrell. Sign+ of Bono, son of Sanla. Sign+ of Raymond, deacon. Sign+ of William Bernard of Odena. Sign+ of Mir Foget. Sign+ of William Belarot. Sign+ of William Mir of Narbonne. Sign+ of Roger Pons of Narbonne. Sign+ of William Lobaton. Sign+ of Raymond Lobet. Sign+ of Guitard Mir. Sign+ of William of Taradel. Sign+ of Arnall Bernard. Sign+ of Raymond Ermemir. Sign+ of William Bonfill. Sign+ of Bernard Guanalgaud. Sign+ of Mir Amalric. Sign+ of Geribert Guitard. Sign+ of Folcrand, deacon. Sign+ of Bernard Guifred. + Raymond, abbot.&nbsp; Arnall, archdeacon. Girbert Mir Sign+ of Guitard, deacon and judge. Sign+ of William, judge. Sign+ of Peter, priest (presbiter), chaplain of lord Raymond, count, I who wrote this document of sale and quitclaim and release and subscribed it on the day and year above.</p><p></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Dei omnipotentis et eterni Regis nomine. Ego, Ermessindis, filia que fui Adaleizis, comitisse, venditrix et evacuatrix et definitrix sum vobis, domno Raimundo, gracia Dei comiti ac marchioni, et domne Almodi, nutu Dei comitisse. Notissimum atque manifestum est omnibus hominibus veritatem rei infra scribende scientibus, quia comitatus Gerundensis et episcopatus Gerundensis cum omnibus eorum terminis, finibus et pertinenciis, et comitatus Barchinonensis et episcopatus Barchinonensis cum eorum terminis, finibus et pertinenciis, et comitatus Barchinonensis et episcopatus Barchinonensis cum eorum terminis, finibus et pertinenciis omnibus, et comitatus Ausonensis et Minorisensis et episcopatus Ausonensis cum eorum terminis, finibus et pertinenciis omnibus, fuerunt propria avi tui domni Raimundi comitis, viri mei, qui dimisit mihi moriens predictos comitatus et episcopatus per scripturam testamenti vivolario tenore donec viverem. Igitur, ego predicta Ermessindis quia scio, recognosco et confiteor quoniam predicte res propie fuerunt avi tui domni Raimundi predicti, et propinquitate paterna et aviali ac linea consanguineali, sicut inscribitur superiori, magis debentur tibi, predicto Raimundo comiti, eiusdem Raimundi nepoti, quam mihi, propterea vendo, definio et evacuo vobis, predictis domno Raimundo, comiti, et domne Almodi, comitisse, predictos comitatus et episcopatus cum omnibus eorum terminis, finibus et pertinenciis, id est, vendo vobis predictum comitatum Gerundensem et episcopatum Sancte Marie, sedis Gerunde, cum eorum omnibus terminis, finibus et pertinenciis, scilicet, ipsam civitatem Gerundam vendo cum castro Gerundella et omnibus suis muris et turribus et edificiis cum omnibus castris et castellis comitalibus et pertinenciis omnibus et terminis que in predicto comitatu Gerundensi sunt, cum omnibus eorum terminis et pertinenciis et cum omnibus abbadiis que in predicto comitatu et episcopatu sunt, et cum aliis rebus, omnibus, et cum omnibus earum pertinenciis et cum omnibus puigs et rochas, condirectis et eremis, que in predicto comitatu sunt, et cum aliis rebus omnibus que pertinent ad ius comitale. Et similiter vendo vobis ego prediicta Ermenssindis predictum comitatum Barchinonensem et episcopatum Sancte Crucis Sancteque Eulalie, sedis Barchinonensis, cum omnibus eorum terminis, finibus et pertinenciis, cum civitate Barchinona cum suis edificiis, terminis et pertinenciis que in predicto comitatu Barchinonensi sunt, et cum omnibus puigs et rochas, condirectis et eremis, que in predicto comitatu sunt, et cum omnibus dominicaturis comitalibus cum earum pertinenciis, terminis et serviciis que in predicto comitatu Barchinonensi sunt, et cum aliis rebus omnibus que pertinent ad ius comitale in predicto comitatu. Similiter vendo vobis, predictis comiti et comitisse, ego iam dicta Ermessindis comitatum Ausonensem et Minorisensem sponsali federe mihi datum. Minorisensem, dico, comitatum vendo vobis et Sancti Petri, sedis Vici, episcopatum cum omnibus eorum pertinenciis, finibus et terminis et cum civitate diruta que dicitur Minorisa, cum omnibus suis edificiis, terminis et pertinenciis et cum omnibus castris et castellis comitalibus et eorum edificiis, terminis et pertinenciis que in predictis comitalibus Ausonensi et Minorensi et episcopatu predicto Ausonensi sunt, et cum omnibus puigs et rochas, condirectis et eremis, que in predictis comitatibus et episcopatu sunt, et cum ipsis dominicaturis comitalibus, et cum earum pertinenciis omnibus que in predictis comi­tatibus sunt, et cum aliis rebus omnibus que pertinent ad ius comitale in iam dictis comitatibus. Et hec omnia advenerunt mihi, predicte Ermessindi, per testacionem viri mei Raimundi predicti, sicut supradictum est, sive per meum decimum, sive sponsalicium nupcialiter mihi datum, et per quasdam deffiniciones quas feci cum filio meo Berengario, comite, et per quascumque voces. Preterea, ego Ermessindis predicta vendo vobis, predictis comiti et comitisse, ipsum castrum de Begur cum omnibus suis edificiis, terminis et pertinenciis, quod mihi advenit per testacionem et donacionem Udalardi Gauzfredi et per quascumque voces. Et in comitatu Barchinoneusi vendo vobis, predictis comiti et comitisse, castrum de Apierola cum omnibus suis edificiis, terminis et pertinenciis et ser­viciis, quod mihi advenit per comparacionem et per quascumque voces. Necnon eciam ego predicta Ermessindis vendo vobis, predictis comiti et comitisse, ipsum castrum de Pontils cum omnibus suis edificiis, terminis et pertinenciis. Preter hec omnia, ego predicta Ermessindis vendo vobis, predictis comiti et comitisse, castrum de Cardona cum omnibus suis edi­ficiis, terminis et pertinenciis, cum omnibus vocibus et auctoritatibus quas habeo et habere debeo in comitatu et episcopatu Urgellensi quocumque modo et quacumque adquisicione.</p><p>Ego, igitur, prenominata Ermessindis predicta omnia cum omnibus earum pertinenciis, terminis et affrontacionibus, et cum aliis omni­bus ad potestatem comitalem pertinentibus in supradictis rebus omnibus vendo et definio et evacuo vobis, predictis domno Raimundo et domne Almodi, propter precium mille uncias auri, in auro et argento, quas vos, predicti comes et comitissa, mihi, predicte Ermessindi, dedistis et ego a vobis accepi; et est hoc manifestum atque omnibus cognitum. Et omnes meas voces predictarum rerum omnium vobis, predictis comiti et comi­tisse, ego predicta Ermessindis fide firma ac sincera vendo et definio et evacuo et extinguo propter predictum precium, ut ab hodierno die et tem­pore vos, predicti comes Raimundus et comitissa Almodis, et posteritas vestra securi et quieti possideatis predicta omnia in pace sine mea repeticione et contradiccione vel alicuius hominis vel femine. Ad ultimum vero huius vendicionis et definicionis ego sepe dicta Ermessindis definio et evacuo et extinguo omnes meas voces predictarum rerum omnium vestre posteritati cui vos demiseritis predicta omnia aut aliquid de pre­dictis omnibus litteris aut verbis. Quod, si ego predicta Ermessindis venditrix et definitrix et evacuatrix venero amplius contra presentem vendicionem et definicionem et evacuacionem ad irrumpendum quocumque modo et ingenio, non valeam vindicare quod requisiero, sed componam predicta omnia in triplo vobis, predictis comiti et comitisse, aut posteritati vestre. Quod si alius homo vel femina venerit contra pre­sentem vendicionem vel definicionem et evacuacionem, similiter componat predicta omnia aut vobis aut posteritati vestre; et postea firma maneat hec vendicio et definicio et evacuacio omni tempore. Et si alique res sunt, que superius scripte nominatim non sint que mihi, prescripte Ermessindi, quocumque modo vel quacunque voce debeantur vel ad me pertineant intra iam dictos omnes comitatus et intra iam dictos omnes episcopatus et intra eorum terminos, ubicunque sint vel sciri vel inveniri possint, ego prescripta Ermessindis similiter vendo et definio et evacuo iistas res omnes ad ultimum additas propter supradictum precium vobis, predictis comiti et comitisse, et posteritati vestre cui dimiseritis hec suprascripta aut aliquid de suprascriptis rebus omnibus litteris aut verbis. Quod si ego predicta Ermessindis tentavero hoc irrumpere, triplici cogar composicione componere vobis predictis aut posteritati vestre; et postea hoc firmum sit omni tempore. Quod si alius homo vel femina venerit irrumpere hanc adicionem, penam paciatur similem. Acta hec vendicio et definicio et evacuacio ii nonas iunii xxvi regni Henrici, regis. Sig+num Ermessindis, venditricis et evacuatricis, que hanc vendicionem et evacuacionem atque definicionem per presentem scripturam mea propria manu firmatam feci et testes firmare rogavi. +Willielmus, gracia Dei episcopus Ausonensis ecclesie. Sig+num Andrea, abba. Sig+num Amati Eldrici. Udalardus, vicecomes. +Berengarius, abba. Sig+num Geralli, levite et sacriste. Sig+num Raimundi Guifredi. Sig+num Miro, presbiteri. Sig+num Guillelmi, levite. Sig+num Petri Geraldi. Sig+num Gaucelmi Arnalli. Sig+num Iohannes, levita. Sig+num Guanalgaudi de Albars. Sig+num Udalgarii. Petrus, abba. Sig+num Be­rengarius, levita. Sig+num Mironis, sacerdotis. Sig+num Poncii, caput scole. Sig+num Melemar, sacerdotis. Sig+num Ermemirus, presbiter. Sig+num Adalberti Guitardi. Sig+num Guillelmi Borrelli. Sig+num Boni, filii Sanle. Sig+num Raimundi, levite. Sig+num Guillelmi Bernardi de Odena. Sig+num Miro Foget. Sig+num Guillelmi Belarotis. Sig+num Guillelmi Mironis de Narbona. Sig+num Rodgarii Pon­cii Narbonensi[s]. Sig+num Guillelmi Lobatoni. Sig+num Raimundi Lobeti. Sig+num Guitardi Mironis. Sig+num Guillelmi de Taradel. Sig+num Arnalli Bernardi. Sig+num Raimundi Errnemiri. Sig+num Guillelmi Bonifilii. Sig+num Bernardi Guanalgaudi. Sig+num Miro Amalrici. Sig+num Geriberti Guitardi. Sig+num Folcrandus, levita. Sig+num Bernardi Guifredi.&nbsp; +Raimundus, abba. Arnallus, archilevita. Girbert Mir. Sig+num Guitardus, levita et iudex. Sig+num Guillelmus, iudex. Sig+num Petrus, presbiter, capellanus domni Rai­mundi, comitis, qui hanc scripturam vendicionis et evacuacionis et definicionis scripsi et subscripsi die et anno quo supra.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Sale by Ermessenda, viscountess, to her grandson Ramon/ Raymond, count of Barcelona, and his wife Almodis, for the counties of Barcelona, Girona, and Osona, to resolve their long dispute.&nbsp; A <i>castrum </i>is an<i> </i>administrative unit, which includes a fortification/castle at its center.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>LFM 1.220-23, #214.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1057, June 4