---
letter_id: "25701"
title: "A letter from Dalmacius"
ititle: "a letter from dalmacius"
ltr_date: "1114, September 30"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-02-13"
modified: "2016-02-13"
url: "/letter/25701.html"
senders:
  - id: 25700
    name: Dalmacius of Begur
    iname: dalmacius of begur
    type: people
    url: /people/25700.html
receivers:
  - id: 25685
    name: Douce of Gévaudan
    iname: douce of gévaudan
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25685.html
  - id: 25687
    name: Raymond Berenguer III
    iname: raymond berenguer iii
    type: people
    url: /people/25687.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>As is written above, so I Dalmacius, son of the above-written Dalmacius, agree to you, lord Raymond, count, grandson of said count Raymond, and to lady Dulcia, countess, and I shall so hold and keep to you (pl) in right faith, without deception, and to your son or sons or those to whom you leave the county of Girona by word or writing.&nbsp; This agreement is enacted on the 2nd kalends of October of the 7th year of the reign of king Louis.&nbsp; Sign+ of Dalmacius, I who had this agreement made, signed, and asked witnesses to sign.&nbsp; Sign+ of William Raymond, seneschal.&nbsp; Sign+ of Bernard William of Palacio.&nbsp; Sign+ of Umbert.&nbsp; Sign+ of Reamball.&nbsp; Sign+ of William, manciple.&nbsp; Here deacon John imposed the sign+ of the cross.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext31">Sicut superius scriptum est, sic ego Dalmacius, filius suprascripti Dalmacii, convenio tibi, domno Raimundo, comiti, nepoti iam dicti Raimundi comitis, et domne Dulcie, comitisse, et sic tenebo et attendam vobis per rectam fidem, sine engan, et filio vestro vel filiis vel quibus Girundensem comitatum reliqueritis verbo aut scripto. Acta est hec conve­niencia ii kalendas octobris anni vii regni Ludovici, regis. Sig+num Dalmacii, qui hanc convenienciam feci, firmavi et testes firmare rogavi. Sig+num Guilelmi Raimundi, senescalc. Sig+num Bernardi Guilelmi de Palacio. Sig+num Umberti. Sig+num Reamballi. Sig+num Gui­lelmi, mancipi. Hic crucis imposuit sig+num levita Iohannes.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This paragraph comes at the end of an earlier agreement between count Raymond and countess Almodis with Dalmacius Bernardi of Petra Tallada for Begur, dated April 25, 1062.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Liber Feudorum Maior</em>&nbsp; 1.503, #472.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1114, September 30