---
letter_id: "25716"
title: "A letter from Gerberga"
ititle: "a letter from gerberga"
ltr_date: "1112, February 1."
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-02-13"
modified: "2016-02-13"
url: "/letter/25716.html"
senders:
  - id: 25715
    name: Gerberga, countess of Provence
    iname: gerberga, countess of provence
    type: people
    url: /people/25715.html
receivers:
  - id: 25685
    name: Douce of Gévaudan
    iname: douce of gévaudan
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25685.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Let it be known to all men that I, Gerberga, countess, give to you, Dulcia, my daughter, all the honor of counties that I have or ought to have in whatever way, namely Provence, Gévaudan, Carladet, and that honor that is in the county of Rouergue.&nbsp; All these came to me by the authority of my parents and the generosity of my husband, count Gerbert, your father.&nbsp; Said honor, as I have and ought to have it, so I give it to you that you may have and possess it all the days of your life without the favor of any person, and by my right I hand it over to your dominion and power to do whatever pleases you with it.&nbsp; If, however, anyone should presume to disrupt this donation of mine in the future, he would not prevail, but this document would gain perennial force of prior integrity and compensation.&nbsp; Which was enacted on the kalends of February in the 4th year of the reign of king Louis.&nbsp; Sign+ of Gerberga, countess, I who made this donation and signed it and asked the subscribed witnesses to sign.&nbsp; Sign+ of Gaufred Porcellet.&nbsp; Sign+ of Bernard Bertrandi.&nbsp; Sign+ of Ollebert of Canilag.&nbsp; Sign+ of Raymond Avirici.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Omnibus innotescat hominibus quod ego, Girberga, comitissa, dono tibi, Dulcie, filie mee, omnem honorem quem habeo vel habere debeo quocumque modo, comitatum, videlicet, Provincie et Gavaldanensis et Carladensis et illum honorem qui est in comitatu Rutenensi. Que omnia advenerunt mihi voce parentum meorum et largicione viri mei Girberti, comitis, patris tui. Prescriptum, quoque, honorem, sicut ego haheo et habere debeo, sic dono eum tibi ut habeas et possideas omnibus diebus vite tue sine blandimento alicuius persone, et de meo iure in tuo trado dominio et potestate ut facias exinde quicquid tibi placuerit. Hanc, autem, donacionem meam si quis in crastinum disrumpere pressumpserit, nil valeat, sed reintegritatis et composicionis omnibus scriptura hec perenne&nbsp; robur obtineat. Quod est actum kalendas februarii anno iiii Ledovici regis regni. Sig+num Gerberge, comitisse, que hanc donacionem feci et firmavi testibusque subscriptis firmare rogavi. Sig+num Gaufredi Porcelleti. Sig+num Bernardi Bertrandi. Sig+num Olleberti de Canilag. Sig+num Raimundi Avirici.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Act of donation by countess Gerberga of Provence to her daughter Douce/Dulcia who was about to marry the count of Barcelona, giving her Provence, Gévaudan, Carladet and Rouergue.&nbsp; Douce would later agive them to Raymond, with the understanding that he shared them with her.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Liber Feudorum Maior</em>&nbsp; 2.345-46, #875.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1112, February 1.