---
letter_id: "25757"
title: "A letter to Maiafred and Maria"
ititle: "a letter to maiafred and maria"
ltr_date: "1152"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-04-12"
modified: "2021-12-04"
url: "/letter/25757.html"
senders:
  - id: 169
    name: Guillelma of Montpellier
    iname: guillelma of montpellier
    type: woman
  - id: 21227
    name: Bernard Ato V
    iname: bernard ato v
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25756
    name: Maiafred and Maria
    iname: maiafred and maria
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet, in which it is noted – in the year 1152 from the incarnation of the Lord in the reign of king Louis – Bernard Ato V, viscount, and Guilelma, viscountess, his wife,gave to Maiafred and his wife Maria and their children and successors a certain piece of land situated in the tithing of St. Cesarius, in the place that is called Soterribas, as a benefice, for bread and wine, on the condition that said spouses or their successors will pay a quarter from all the fruits and also from each cartariata (measure of land) one capon of rent.&nbsp; For which donation, said Bernard had 20 solidos of St. Gilles &nbsp;and said Guillelma 10 solidos of St. Gilles from said spouses. – “Witnesses:&nbsp; Peter of Venobrio (sic), Guirald of Olmeto, and six others.&nbsp; Bernard, ordered by both sides, wrote it.”</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Chirographum, per litteras alphabeti divisum, quo notum fit, -- anno ab incarnatione Domini M.C.LII, regnante Lodoyco rege, -- Bernardum Atonem V vicecomitem, et Guillelmam vicecomitissam, uxorem ejus, quandam peciam terrae sitam in decimaria Sancti Cesarii, in loco qui vocatur Soterribas, Maiafredo et Mariae ejus uxori eorumque infantibus et successoribus in beneficium, ad panem et ad vinum, dedisse, ea lege ut praefati conjuges vel eorum successores de omnibus fructibus cartum nec non, de unaquaque cartariata, I. caponem de censu sint soluturi.&nbsp; Propter quam donationem praefatus Bernardus XX sol. Egidienses et praedicta Guillelma X. sol. Egid. a praedictis conjugibus habuerunt. – “Testes:&nbsp; :&nbsp; Petrus de Venobrio; Guiraldus de Olmeto; Poncius de Sancto Cesario, et sex alii.&nbsp; Bernardus, mandatus ex utraque parte, scripsit.”</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This records a charter in which the viscount and viscountess gave a piece of land to a man and his wife on agreement of annual payments.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Layettes du Trésor des Chartes,&nbsp;1.70, #128.</i></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1152