---
letter_id: "25780"
title: "A letter from Henry, count of Grand-pré"
ititle: "a letter from henry, count of grand-pré"
ltr_date: "1203, September"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-04-19"
modified: "2021-04-03"
url: "/letter/25780.html"
senders:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
  - id: 25779
    name: Henry, count of Grand-pré
    iname: henry, count of grand-pré
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Henry IV, count of Grand-pré makes known the agreement made between himself and his dearest lady, B[lanche] countess of Troy, over the <em>castrum</em> of St. John.&nbsp; From&nbsp; which it was agreed namely that Giles of St. John would hold the fortress of the first embankment around the mill, and also the men of St. Remy of Reims, St. Peter of Avesnes and St. Martin of Épernay, in liege fiefdom from said countess;&nbsp; from the said count of Grand-pré, he will hold the town in which the church sits, with justice and ban, inside as well as outside; and that count will hold the said<em> castrum</em> from the said countess.&nbsp; “That it should remain firm, I wished the present page to be made and I strengthened it with the witness of my seal.&nbsp; Enacted at Sézanne, in the 1203rd year of the Lord, in the month of September.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Henricus IV comes Grandis-prati notam facit compositionem inter se et karissiniam dominam suam B. comitissam Trecensem de castro S. Johannis initam. — Ex qua scilicet concordatum est ut Gilo de S. Johanne forteritiam primi fossati circa molam, et praeterea homines S. Remigii Remensis, S. Petri de Advenaio et S. Martini de Spernaco, in feodum ligium, a praefata comitissa teneat; a praedicto autem comite Grandis-prati tenebit burgum in quo sedet ecclesia, cum justitia et banno, tam intus quam extra; et ipse comes antedictum castrum de praefata co­mitissa tenebit. — « Quod ut permaneat firmum, presentem paginam fieri volui et sigilli mei testimonio roboravi. Actum apud Sezanniam, anno Domini m° ducentesimo tercio, mense septembri. »</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The charter records an agreement to divide a <em>castrum</em> to be held by Giles of St. John, a part from count Henry, a part from the countess. &nbsp;A&nbsp;<i>castrum&nbsp;</i>is an<i>&nbsp;</i>administrative unit, which includes a fortification at its center.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Layettes du Trésor des Chartes, </i>1.245, #694.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1203, September