---
letter_id: "25795"
title: "A letter from Aubert of Darney"
ititle: "a letter from aubert of darney"
ltr_date: "1216/1217, March"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-05-02"
modified: "2016-05-02"
url: "/letter/25795.html"
senders:
  - id: 25794
    name: Aubert, lord of Darney
    iname: aubert, lord of darney
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>I Aubert, lord of Darney, make known to all present and future that since I held thirty pounds of annual rent in fief and homage in the fairs of Bar-sur-Aube from my lady Blanche, illustrious countess, and her son Thibaut, count of Champagne, for which I was and up to now am their man, that countess, to increase my said fief, assigned me fifteen pounds in those fairs of Bar-sur-Aube, to be received each year, so that I have there forty five pounds of annual rents.&nbsp; – Because of which, I promised firmly and swore that I will help that countess and her son Thibaut against Erard of Brienne and against his wife Philippa, and against their allies, faithfully within my power, and that I will make war against those Erard and Philippa and their allies if need be, for said countess and count.&nbsp; And also the people of that countess and count will be received in my castrum of Darney and may stay there, if need be, to make war on Erard of Brienne and the allies of that Erard and his wife Philippa for said countess and count Thibaut. – Given in the year of the Lord 1216, in the month of March.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Ego Aubertus dominus Darniaci notum fieri volo presentibus et futuris quod, cum tenerem in feodum et homagium triginta libras annui redditus in nundinis Barri de domina mea Blancha, illustri comitissa, et Theobaldo nato ejus, comite Campanie, propter quod eram et adhuc sum homo ipsorum, ipsa comi­tissa, in aumentum predicti feodi mei, assignavit mihi quindecim libras in eisdem nundinis Barri, annis sin­gulis percipiendas, ita quod ibidem habeo quadraginta quinque libras annui redditus. — Propter quod&nbsp; promisi firmiter et juravi quod ipsam comitissam et Theobaldum, filium suum, contra Erardum de Brena et contra Philipam uxorem ejus, et contra coadjutores eorum, pro posse meo fideliter adjuvabo, et ipsos Erardum et Philipam, et coadjutores eorum, si opus fuerit, pro dictis comitissa et comite guerriabo. Et etiam gentes ipsorum comitisse et comitis in castro meo Darniaco recipientur et ibi moram facient, si opus fuerit, ad guerriandum Erardum de Brena et coadjutores ipsius Erardi et Philippe uxoris sue pro dictis comitissa et comite Theobaldo. – Datum anno Domini m° cc° sextodecimo, mense marcio.<i> </i></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This letter records a payment the countess and her son make to Aubert annually at the fairs of Bar-sur-Aube. &nbsp;Another, recorded in Evergates <em>Cartulary</em>, 226-27, dated March 1217, announces an additional 15l. to be added to the 30 he already receives. &nbsp;A <em>castrum</em> is a fortification with an administrative center. &nbsp;For&nbsp;similar agreements of rents from fairs, see Evergates, <em>Cartulary</em>, #235-42).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Layettes du Trésor des Chartes</i>, 1.441, #1208.&nbsp; &nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1216/1217, March