---
letter_id: "25814"
title: "A letter from Emma"
ititle: "a letter from emma"
ltr_date: "1015"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-02"
modified: "2021-11-30"
url: "/letter/25814.html"
senders:
  - id: 25809
    name: Emma of Provence
    iname: emma of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25809.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>I, Emma, countess, daughter of count Rothbold and Ermengarde his wife, my mother, from the inheritance which came to me by law (legitimately), which is in the county of Fréjus, in the <em>castrum</em> called Favars in which territory I give to the Lord God and St. Mary of Correns the church of St. Pons the martyr with all its appurtenances, that is the tithe, oblation, first fruits, cemetery, cultivated and uncultivated lands, pastures or olive groves, etc. into the hand of Imbert, the provost of Correns, and moreover I give one property in Brignola.&nbsp; This charter of alms was made at the order of lady Emma, countess, on the 10th kalends of May, in the year 1015 of the lord’s Incarnation, in the reign of king Robert.&nbsp; Sign of countess Emma who signs with her own hand.&nbsp; Sign of Heldebert of Castro-Rainaldo, etc.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>EGO Ema comitissa, filia Rotboldi comitis &amp; Hermengardae, uxoris ejus, matris meae, ex haereditate quae mihi legitime&nbsp; obvenit, hoc est in comitatu Forojuliensi, in castro quod nominatur Favart, in hujus territorio, dono Domino Deo &amp; Sanctae Mariae Corredis, ecclesiam Sancti Pontii martyris cum omnibus appenditiis suis, hoc est decimum, oblationem, primitias, cimeterium, terras cultas &amp; incultas, pascua sive oglata, &amp;c., in manu Ymberti praepositi Corredis, &amp; insuper dono unum mansum in Brignola. Facta carta eleemosynaria, mandante domna Ema comitissa, X cal. maii, anno Dominicae Incarnationis MXV, regnante Roberto rege. S. Ema comitissa propria manu firmat.&nbsp; S. Heldebertus de Castro-Rainaldo, etc.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Donation by the countess of a church to the priory of St. Mary of Correns. &nbsp;A <em>castrum</em> is an administrative unit with a fortification, often a castle at the center.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Histoire Générale de Languedoc, 5.361-62, #172, CXLVII.</i></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1015