---
letter_id: "25826"
title: "A letter from John, king of Jerusalem"
ititle: "a letter from john, king of jerusalem"
ltr_date: "1222"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-03"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/25826.html"
senders:
  - id: 25825
    name: John, king of Jerusalem
    iname: john, king of jerusalem
    type: people
    url: /people/25825.html
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
  - id: 26187
    name: Thibaut IV, count of Champagne
    iname: thibaut iv, count of champagne
    type: people
    url: /people/26187.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To the noble lady Blanche, palatine countess of Troyes and her son Thibaut, John, by the grace of God king of Jerusalem [sends] greetings and everything good.&nbsp; We make known to you that we, of our good and spontaneous will gave and granted to our nephew Walter, son of our most beloved brother of good memory Walter, count of Brienne, and his heirs the lords of Brienne, Onjon and Luyères with all their appurtenances, and the whole land that we held from the noble Thibaut late count of Champagne on such condition that if in the future we disposed of said land otherwise, nothing in the disposition we made could hinder that gift which we made of said land to said Walter.&nbsp; That is what we ask and asking entreat you that you have the said Walter, our nephew, invested and seised of said land under the said pacts, and that you receive homage from him for that land under the same pacts.&nbsp; Given at Acre, in the year of the Lord 1222, on the octave of the ides of May.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Nobili domine Blanche comitisse Campanie Trecensis palatine, et Theob(aldo) ipsius filio. Johannes Die gratia Jerusolim rex salutem, et omne bonum. Notum vobis facimus, quod nos de bona et spontanea voluntate nostra dedimus et concessimus Galtero nepoti nostro, dilectissimi fratris nostri bone memorie Galteri comitis Brene filio et heredibus ipsius dominis Brene, Ongon et Lujeres cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, et totam terram quam de Theobaldo nobili quondam comite Campanie tenebamus, tali tamen conditione, quod si in antea de supradicta terra aliud disposuerimus, dispositioni quam faciemus nichil possit obesse domum istud quod de dicta terra dicto G(altero) fecimus. Hinc est quod a vobis petimus et petendo deprecamur, quatinus sepedictum Galterum nepotem nostrum de terra sepedicta sub dictis pactionibus investiri et saisiri faciatis, et etiam de ipsa terra sub eisdem pactionibus homagium ab ipso recipiatis. Datum Accorum, anno Domini M CC XXII, octavo idus maii.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The king asks the countess to invest his nephew with his family lands and receive his homage for them.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 64, #38.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1222