---
letter_id: "25830"
title: "A letter from Geoffrey, bishop of Meaux"
ititle: "a letter from geoffrey, bishop of meaux"
ltr_date: "1208, October"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-03"
modified: "2021-04-03"
url: "/letter/25830.html"
senders:
  - id: 25829
    name: Geoffrey, bishop of Meaux
    iname: geoffrey, bishop of meaux
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>I Geoffrey, by permission of God [bishop]-elect of Meaux.&nbsp; Let all who will look into the present letters know that we have entered an association with lady Blanche, countess of Troyes, over the money of Troyes, Provins, and Meaux, when/since there is a place to mint [the coins] for three full years from the current feast of St. Martin in such a way, namely, that wherever it is minted, at Troyes or Provins or Meaux, said countess will have two parts and we will have the third from all the minting and the work that is done for the minting and from all the income that will come out of it in whatever way it comes.&nbsp; In witness of which thing, we have had the present letters made defended by the affixing of our seal.&nbsp; Enacted at Nogent in the year of the Word incarnate, 1208, in the month of October.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Ego Gau(fridus) Dei permissione Meldensis electus. Noverint universi presentes litteras inspecturi, quod nos cum domina B(lancha) comitissa Trecensis super moneta, Trecis, Pruvini, et Meldis cum locus fuerit fabricanda societatem inivimus ab instanti festo beati Martini usque ad tres annos completos, tali modo scilicet, quod ubicumque fuerit fabricatum, sive Trecis sive Pruvini, sive Meldis, dicta comitissa de omni monetagio, et de servicio quod fiet pro mo­neta, et de omnibus proventibus que inde provenient quocumque modo proveniant, duas partes habebit, et nos tertiam habebimus. In cujus rei testimonium presentes litteras fecimus sigilli nostri appensione munitas. Actum Nogenti anno incarnati Verbi M CC VIII mense octobri.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Agreement on minting between the countess and the bishop of Meaux. &nbsp; His successor reaffirmed the agreement, see #69 (<em>Epistolae</em> 25832.html), June 25, 1214.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009) 91, #65.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><p></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1208, October