---
letter_id: "25835"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy"
ltr_date: "1219, June"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-03"
modified: "2016-06-03"
url: "/letter/25835.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
  - id: 21304
    name: count Thibaud, her son
    iname: count thibaud, her son
    type: people
    url: /people/21304.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Alix, duchess of Burgundy, to her dearest and faithful Blanche, countess palatine of Troyes and her son, Thibaut, greetings and love.&nbsp; Having full faith in you, we ask, and require in love, that you be pledges and debtors in the hand of Ponce of Chaponnay for the five hundred pounds Provins and costs, to be paid back in the coming fairs of St. John of Troyes.&nbsp; And we will indemnify you, otherwise we wish and grant that you can hold us as pledge without guilt.&nbsp; Enacted in the year of grace 1219, in June.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Alaydis ducissa Burgundie. Blanche comitisse Trecensis palatine, et Theobaldo filio suo karissimus et fidelibus suis salutem, et amorem. De vobis plenam fiduciam habentes vos rogamus et in amore requirimus, quatinus sitis plegii et debitores in manu Pontii de Chaponay de quingentis libris pruvinensis et de costis, reddendis in instantibus nundinis Trecarum Sancti Johannis. Et nos inde servabimus vos indampnes, alioquin volumus et concedimus quod possitis nos vadiare sine mesfacere. Actum anno gratie M CC nonodecimo, in junio.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The duchess asks the countess and her son to be pledges for her debt to Ponce of Chaponnay.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 110, #91.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, June