---
letter_id: "25834"
title: "A letter from Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy"
ititle: "a letter from alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy"
ltr_date: "1219, December 2"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-03"
modified: "2016-06-03"
url: "/letter/25834.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Alix, duchess of Burgundy, to her dearest faithful Blanche, countess palatine of Troyes, greetings and fullness of love.&nbsp; We announce, we ask and require/request that you make your letters of conduct for Ponce of Lyon according to the form of letters of conduct which said Ponce has from us.&nbsp; We also ask you that you be a pledge to said Ponce for the firm observance of the conduct according to the form of our letters.&nbsp; And if you incur some harm in this, we will be held to restore all the harm fully.&nbsp; Enacted in the year of the Lord 1219, on the Monday after the feast of St. Andrew.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Alaydis ducissa Burgundie karissime et fideli sue Blanche comitisse Trecensis palatine, salutem, et amoris plenitudinem. Mandamus vobis rogamus et requirimus, quatinus Pontio de Lugduno litteras vestras de conductu faciatis secun­dum formam litterarum quas a nobis habet dictus Pontius de conductu. Rogamus vos etiam quod sitis erga dictum Pontium plegia de conductu secun­dum formam litterarum nostrarum firmiter observando. Et si in hoc aliquid dampnum incurreretis, nos vobis omnia dampna tenemur penitus restaurare. Actum anno Domini M CC nonodecimo, die lune post festum sancti Andree.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The duchess informs the countess that she has granted a safe-conduct to Ponce of Chaponnay and asks her to do the same, promising to make good any harm that might come of it.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 108-09, #88.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, December 2