---
letter_id: "25832"
title: "A letter from William, bishop of Meaux"
ititle: "a letter from william, bishop of meaux"
ltr_date: "1214, June 25"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-03"
modified: "2021-04-03"
url: "/letter/25832.html"
senders:
  - id: 25831
    name: William, bishop of Meaux
    iname: william, bishop of meaux
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To his venerable lady and illustrious Blanche, countess palatine of Troyes, William, by divine permission the elect [bishop] of Meaux, [sends] greetings in the Lord.&nbsp; We make known to you that since brother Haimard spoke on the association which was made over money between you and our venerable predecessor father Geoffrey, late bishop of Meaux, we approve and affirm that that association will be preserved stable and firm between us through the stated term. Enacted in the year of the Lord 1214 on the day after St. John.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Venerabili domine ac illustri Blanche comitisseTrecensis palatine. Willelmus divina permissione Meldensis electus, salutem in Domino. Notum vobis facimus vos, cum fratre Aymardo loquutos fuisse super societate que facta fuit super monetam inter vos et venerabilem patrem predecessorem nostrum G(aufridum) quondam Meldensis episcopum, gratum autem habemus et ratum, ut eadem societas usque ad statutum terminum stabilis ac firma inter nos conservetur. Actum anno Domini M CC quartodecimo in crastino beati Johannis.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The bishop-elect reaffirms the agreement on minting coins made by his predecessor, as stated in #65 (<em>Epistolae</em> 25830.html) October, 1208.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 93-94, #69.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1214, June 25