---
letter_id: "25846"
title: "A letter from William, provost of Chablis"
ititle: "a letter from william, provost of chablis"
ltr_date: "1211"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-04"
modified: "2021-04-03"
url: "/letter/25846.html"
senders:
  - id: 25845
    name: William, provost of Chablis
    iname: william, provost of chablis
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To his dearest lady Blanche, illustrious countess of Troyes, her in all things William, provost of Chablis, greetings in the author of salvation.&nbsp; We give richest thanks to you for granting us at our request that what we have in the town of Chablis which is in our custody, be placed in the hand of lord William of Chapelle &nbsp;for the established term.&nbsp; Not wishing therefore that harm or injury come to you or your successor lords of Champagne in the future from what you did so kindly for love of us and our request, we witness by the present letters to all that you did this saving your said custody and saving your claim and every right.&nbsp; And we firmly grant that after that term, neither said William nor any other can hold said [holding] unless by your consent and will, but all of it will return into our hand and yours as they were before with all your rights, and we do not wish, nor can we, nor ought we take anything from your custody of said holding.&nbsp; Enacted in the year of grace 1221.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Karissime domine sue B(lanche) illustri comitisse Trecensis, suus in omnibus, Willelmus prepositus Chableiarum salutem in salutis Auctore. Grates vobis referimus uberrimas super eo quod ad preces nostras concessistis, ut ea que habemus in villa Chableiarum que est in custodia nostra, ponantur in manu domini W(illelmi) de Capella usque ad terminum constitutum. Nolentes igitur in futurum ex eo quod pro amore nostra et precibus tam benigne fecistis, presentibus litteris testificamus universis, quod id fecistis salva predicta custodia vestra et salvo gistio et omni jure vestro. Et firmiter concedimus quod post terminum illum nec dictus Willermus, nec alius predicta tenere possit nisi de assensu et voluntate vestra, set omnia tunc redeant in manu nostra et in vestra sicut prius erant cum omni jure vestro, et custodia vestra de qua predicta subtrahere non volumus nec possumus nec debemus. Actum anno gratie M CC XI.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>William thanks the countess for allowing him to transfer his custody of Chablis for a limited term. &nbsp;The king's letter describes Guillaume of La Chapelle&nbsp;as a royal sergeant who received the provostship of Chablis for 7 years, w. Blanche’s approval <em>Layettes</em>, 1.366, #964). &nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 210-11, #222.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1211