---
letter_id: "25858"
title: "A letter from the church of Châlons"
ititle: "a letter from the church of châlons"
ltr_date: "1207, March"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-04"
modified: "2021-04-03"
url: "/letter/25858.html"
senders:
  - id: 25857
    name: Hugh, dean and the church of Châlons
    iname: hugh, dean and the church of châlons
    type: people
    url: /people/25857.html
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To his venerable and dearest lady Blanche, countess palatine of Troyes.&nbsp; Hugh, the dean, and the whole chapter of the church of Châlons, [send] greetings and sincere love in the Lord.&nbsp; Giving thanks to your benevolence in many ways over this that you have so often answered our prayers and carried out our petitions, we ask your highness as affectionately as we can, that you offer the men who remain in our land at Saint-Julien-de-Courtisols help and defence faithfully against all who oppress them. You should know that, saving our right, we have the established custom which the men promised they would pay us annually from each home in that town, namely one measure of oats according to the measure of Châlons, and 12 denari to be paid on the feast of St. Remy, on the condition that that custom was established by said men for their protection.&nbsp; Others to give, sell, commute, mortgage, or in any way alienate from your hand and your heirs’ to our hand and heirs'&nbsp; will not be permitted.&nbsp; So wishing that this be passed on to memory perpetually, we beg you that you send your letters to us and have contained in your letters [the text of] our letters and that that custom will never be increased in the future.&nbsp; Enacted in the 1206th year of the Lord, in the month of March.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Venerabili et karissime domine Blanche, comitisse Trecensis palatine. Hugo decanus totumque Cathalaunensis ecclesie capitulum salutem et sinceram in Domino caritatem. Vestre benignitati gratias referentes multimodis super hoc quod precibus nostris sepius acquievistis, et peticiones nostras effectui mancipastis, rogamus quantum possimus affectuose sublimitatem vestram, quatinus homines qui manent in terra nostra apud Sanctum Julianum de Cortisor contra omnes oppressores suos auxilium et defensionem fideliter exhibeatis. Sciatis enim quod nos salvo jure nostra ratam habemus costumiam quam idem ho­mines promiserunt se nobis a singulis domibus in villa eadem annuatim reddituros, videlicet unam minam avene ad mensuram Cathalaunum, et XII denarios in festo sancti Remigii percipiendos, sub hac tamen conditione quod costumiam illam a predictis hominibus pro se tuendis constitutam. Alii dare, vendere, commutare, pignori obligare, vel aliquo modo a vestra et heredum vestrorum manu nobis et eisdem heredibus non licebit alienare. Volentes itaque uthoc perpetue tradatur memorie, supplicamus nobis, quatinus litteras vestras nobis mittatis, et has litteras nostras illamque costumiam nequid in futuro superaddatur in litteris vestris contineri faciatis. Actum anno Domini M CC sexto, mense martio.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The church of Châlons asks the countess to support the men at Saint-Julien and accept the customary payment as&nbsp; fixed.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 308-09, #350.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1207, March