---
letter_id: "25868"
title: "A letter from William, count of Vienne and Mâcon"
ititle: "a letter from william, count of vienne and mâcon"
ltr_date: "1219, January 11"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-04"
modified: "2016-06-04"
url: "/letter/25868.html"
senders:
  - id: 25867
    name: William. count of Vienne and Mâcon
    iname: william. count of vienne and mâcon
    type: people
    url: /people/25867.html
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
  - id: 21304
    name: count Thibaud, her son
    iname: count thibaud, her son
    type: people
    url: /people/21304.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To his dearest lady Blanche, countess palatine of Troyes, and his illustrious lord Thibaut her son, William count of Vienne and Mâcon [sends] greetings and reverence and honor.&nbsp; We wish to inform you that with the consent and will of our wife Scolastica, we have given and granted to our son Henry of Vienne, five thousand solidos which we have from your fairs of Champagne, on the condition that that Henry cannot give them to anyone in any way, nor mortgage them to anyone beyond four years running.&nbsp; Whence we ask you most assiduously that you have them paid to him or his messenger as you have had them paid to us up to now.&nbsp; Enacted in the 1218th year of the Lord, third ides of Janury, at Mâcon.&nbsp; In witness of which thing we have had the present page strengthened by the protection of our seal.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Karissime domine sue Blanche, comitisse Trecensis palatine, et illustrissimo domino Th(eobaldo) filio suo, W(illemus) Vienne et Masticonensis comes, salutem et reverentiam et honorem. Vobis intimari cupimus quod de consensu et voluntate Scol(astica) uxoris nostre dedimus et concessimus Henrico de Vienna filio nostra quinque milia solidorum quos habebamus in nundinis vestris Campanie tali interposita conditione, quod ipse Henricus non possit eos dare alicui ullo modo, nec obligare alicui ultra quatuor annos continuos. Unde rogamus nos attentius, quatinus illos de cetera sibi vel nuntio suo persolvi faciatis, sicut usque modo nobis persolvi fecistis. Actum anno Domini M CC decimo octavo, tertio idus januarii, Matiscone. In cujus rei testimonium presentem paginam sigilli nostri munimine fecimus roborari.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Count William of Vienne and Mâcon, informs the countess and her son that he and his wife wish the rents he has received from the fairs to Champagne be paid henceforth to their son.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 344-45, #390.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, January 11