---
letter_id: "25873"
title: "A letter from Alix"
ititle: "a letter from alix"
ltr_date: "1220, April"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-05"
modified: "2021-11-18"
url: "/letter/25873.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/78.html
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>I, Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters that when my dearest friend and faithful Blanche, countess of Champagne, at my request gave back Evrard, the knight of my marshall whom she had long held captive at Bar-sur-Aube because he was said to have been involved in the plundering of the townsmen of that countess, and of Peter of Petraria of Cahors, I granted and grant to said countess and her son Thibaut count of Champagne, that if on the occasion of capture of said knight there might be harm or injury done to said countess and count or their men or merchants in the future, I would be held to make good that harm and injury completely.&nbsp; In witness of which things I have had the present letters made and strengthened by the protection of my seal. &nbsp;Enacted in the year of grace 1220, in the month of April.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Ego Alaydis ducissa Burgundie. Notum facio universis presentes litteras inspecturis, quod cum karissima amica et fidelis mea Blancha comitissa Campanie ad preces meas mihi reddidisset Evrardum militem marescalli mei quem diu captum tenuerat apud Barrum pro eo quod dicebatur interfuisse spoliationi burgensium ejusdem comitisse, et Petri de Petraria de Caors, ego dicte comitisse et Th(eobaldi) nato ejus comiti Campanie concessi et concedo, quod si occasione captionis dicti militis predictis comitsse et comiti vel eorum hominibus aut mercatoribus in futurum dampnum fieret vel gravamen, ego dampnum illud et gravamen in integrum restaurare tenerer. In cujus rei testimonium presentes litteras feci fieri et sigilli mei munimine roborari. Actum anno gratie M CC XX, mense aprili.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The duchess takes responsibility for any harm that might come of the release of one her men arrested for plunder by Blanche of Navarre, countess of Champagne.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 106, #85.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1220, April