---
letter_id: "25876"
title: "A letter from Alix"
ititle: "a letter from alix"
ltr_date: "1219, December 2"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-05"
modified: "2016-06-05"
url: "/letter/25876.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/168.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>I Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all who will look at the present letters that I in good faith received under my [safe] conduct Pons of Chaponay, citizen of Lyons, as far as Chalon[-sur Saône] and when he will be at Chalon, I am held to send people to him who can conduct him with everything without losing anything to the land of the countess of Champagne, my beloved and faithful, and on the return of that Pons from the land of said countess, I am held to give [safe] conduct to that Pons as was said, and in good faith.&nbsp; These letters last [in force] to the middle of Lent.&nbsp; Enacted in the year of the Lord 1219, on the Monday after the feast of St. Andrew.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Ego Alaydis ducissa Burgundie. Omnibus presentes litteras inspecturis. Notum facio quod ego bona fide recepi in conductu meo Pontium de Chaponay, civem Lugdunensis, usque ad Cabilonsem, et quando erit apud Cabilonsem, ego teneor ad eum gentes mittere que eum possint conducere de omnibus sine aliquid amittere usque in terram comitisse Campanie dilecte et fidelis mee, et in reditu ipsius Pontii a terra dicte comitisse teneor eumdem Pontium conducere sicut predictum est, et bona fide. Durent littere iste usque ad mediam quadragesimam. Actum anno Domini M CC nonodecimo, die lune post festum Sancti Andree.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The duchess announces her safe-conduct to Pons of Chaponay, to be escorted by her people to Champagne and back again.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 109-110, #90.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, December 2