---
letter_id: "25875"
title: "A letter from Alix"
ititle: "a letter from alix"
ltr_date: "1219, May 31"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-05"
modified: "2021-03-29"
url: "/letter/25875.html"
senders:
  - id: 168
    name: Alix of Vergy, duchess of Burgundy
    iname: alix of vergy, duchess of burgundy
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>I Alix, duchess of Burgundy, make known to all that our dearest faithful, Blanche, countess palatine of Troyes, at our request and urging, received Pons of Chaponnary, citizen of Lyons, in her [safe] conduct in good faith from us and our power until the next following feast of St. Mary Magdalene.&nbsp; If indeed any harm or injury should happen to said countess because of this, we would be held to make it all good to her, or she could claim [vadiare] it from us without crime.&nbsp; Enacted in the year of grace 1219, on the last day of May.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Ego Alaydis ducissa Burgundie. Omnibus notum facimus quod karissima et fidelis nostra Blancha comitissa Trecensis palatina, ad preces et instantiam nostram, recepit Pontium de Chaponai civem Lugdunenis in conductu suo bona fide de nobis et de posse nostra usque ad proximo sequens festum beate Marie Magdalene. Si vero propter hoc dicte comitisse aliquod dampnum vel gravamen perveniret, totum ei restituere teneremur, vel ipsa posset nos vadiare sine mesfacere. Actum anno gratie M CC nonodecimo, ultima die maii.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The duchess announces that the countess of Champagne has granted safe-conduct to one of her men, at her request.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 109, #89.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, May 31