---
letter_id: "25870"
title: "A letter from Scolastica, countess of Vienne and Mâcon"
ititle: "a letter from scolastica, countess of vienne and mâcon"
ltr_date: "1219, January 11"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-06-04"
modified: "2016-06-04"
url: "/letter/25870.html"
senders:
  - id: 25869
    name: Scolastica, countess of Vienne and Mâcon 
    iname: scolastica, countess of vienne and mâcon 
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 78
    name: Blanche of Navarre, Countess of Champagne
    iname: blanche of navarre, countess of champagne
    type: woman
  - id: 21304
    name: count Thibaud, her son
    iname: count thibaud, her son
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To her dearest lady and sister Blanche, countess palatine of Troyes, and her dearest lord and nephew Thibaut, her son, Scolastica, countess of Vienne and Mâcon [sends] greetings and reverence and love.&nbsp; You should know that William, count of Vienne and Mâcon, my husband gave and granted to Henry of Vienne our son, with our consent and will, five thousand solidos which he had from your fairs of Champagne, pacifically and peacefully, on the condition that that Henry cannot give them to anyone in any way, nor mortgage them to anyone beyond four years running.&nbsp; Whence we ask you that you now have said money paid to said Henry or his messenger annually as you were accustomed to have them paid to said count.&nbsp; Enacted in the 1218th year of the Lord, third ides of January, at Mâcon.&nbsp; In witness of which thing I have had the present letters strengthened by the protection of my our seal, at the request of said count.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Karissime domine et sorori sue Blanche comitisse Trecensis palatine et karissimo domino et nepoti suo Th(eobaldo) filio ejus, Scol(astica) comitissa Vienne et Masticonensis, salutem et reverentiam et amorem. Sciatis quod W(illemus) comes Vienne et Masticonensis maritus meus donavit et concessit Henrico de Vienna filio nostro de consensu et voluntate nostra quinque milia solidorum quos habebat in nundinis vestris Campanie de cetera pacifice et quiete, tali conditione interposita, quod idem H(enricus) non possit illos dare alicui ullo modo nec obligare alicui ultra quatuor continuos annos. Unde rogamus vos quatinus dictos nummos prefato H(enrico) persolvi faciatis amodo annuatim vel nuntio, sicut predicto comiti reddere solebatis. Actum anno Domini M CC decimo octavo, tertio idus januarii, Masticone. In cujus rei testimonium presentem litteras ad preces dicti comitis feci sigilli mei munimine roboari.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The countess of Vienne and Mâcon informs her sister-in-law and her nephew of her husband’s gift to their son of revenue from the fairs of Champagne. &nbsp;Cf. her husband's letter, #390.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Cartulary of Countess Blanche of Champagne</i>, edited by Theodore Evergates, © The Medieval Academy of America 2010 (University of Toronto Press, 2009), 345-46, #391.&nbsp; Reprinted with permission of the press.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219, January 11