---
letter_id: "25907"
title: "A letter from the count of Pallars"
ititle: "a letter from the count of pallars"
ltr_date: "April 7, 1064"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-09-15"
modified: "2016-09-15"
url: "/letter/25907.html"
senders:
  - id: 25908
    name: Count Artau I of Pallars
    iname: count artau i of pallars
    type: people
    url: /people/25908.html
receivers:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
    url: /people/25618.html
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25615.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I Artau/Artal, count, and my wife Lucia, countess, to you, our buyers, Raymond, count and your wife Valencia, countess.&nbsp; By this document of our sale and exchange, we sell or commute to you that <i>castrum</i> of Rivert and of Castegion and of Adonc and of Vivo, Adlavata, and that of Enrence, and of Vilba and the monastery of Lavalgos and the <i>castrum</i> of Eril and the towns of Durro and of Taul and of Cardet and of Bogin and of Eril and of Balorsera.&nbsp; These said <i>castros</i> and said monastery and said towns, all these with their boundaries and appurtenances and rights we sell and commute to you, said Raymond and your said wife, as your own fullest allod to do whatever you wish.&nbsp; And we accept from you as price and exchange that town of Esil, of Son, of Ordac and of Issavari with all that you have and ought to have, and that monastery of St. Peter in Anavi, with the honor which you have and ought to have in that Vallat, and that monastery of St. Peter at Burgal, with the honor you have and ought to have there, and with those parishes of Archal and St. Peter of Malezas, the monastery with the whole honor which you have and ought to have, and with the <i>castrum</i> of Petra Bruna and of Reguart.&nbsp; And it came to me, Artal, from my father by whatever rights and to me Lucia, by my tenth and whatever rights.&nbsp; And all these are in the county of Pallars.&nbsp; And these all are delimited on all sides within said county; and all this is manifest.&nbsp; And if we, sellers and exchangers, and any man should attempt to disrupt all these, he could not prevail, but he or we must pay all the above doubly and with all increase/improvement; and this charter should remain firm in the future, what was said now or at any time may not be broken.&nbsp; This charter was made on the 7th ides of April in the 4th year of the reign of king Philip.&nbsp; Sign+ of Artal.&nbsp; Sign+ of Lucia, we who had this charter made and asked witnesses to sign it.&nbsp; Sign+ of Bertran Ato.&nbsp; Sign+ of baron Ato. Sign+ of Gido Ato.&nbsp; Sign+ of Giglem (William?) Arnal. Sign+ of Pons Mir. Sign+ of Rodlant Ricolf. Sign+ of Peter Radolf. Sign+ of Remon Giglem. Sign+ of Bernad baron. Sign+ of Arnal Mir de Tost.&nbsp; Sign+ of Hug Mir. Sign+ of Alaman Altemir.&nbsp; Martin, priest, wrote as asked on the day and year above.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine Domini.&nbsp; Ego Artallus, comes, et coniux mea Lucia, comitissa, vobis, emptoribus nostris, Raimundus, comes, et coniux tua Valencia, comitissa.&nbsp; Per hanc scripturam vendicionis nostre et commutacionis nostre, vindimus vobis vel commutamus ipso castro de Rivert et ipso castro de Castegion et ipso castro de Adone et ipso castro de Vivo, Adlavata et ipso castro de Enrence, et ipso castro de Vilba et ipso monasterio de Lavalgos et ipso castro de Eril et ipsa villa de Durro et ipsa villa de Taul et ipsa villa de Cardet et ipsa villa de Bogin et ipsa villa de Eril et ipsa villa de Balorsera.&nbsp; Istos castros dictos et ipso monasterio iam dicto et istas villas iam dictas, hec omnia iam dicta, cum illorum terminis et pertinencias .et directos, sic vindimus vobis et commutamus ego Artallo iam dicto et coniux mea suprascripta ad vos, Raimundo suprascrito, et coniux vestra iam dicta, ad vestrum plenissimum proprium alode ad facere quodcumque volueritis. Et de vos accepimus precium et commutationes ipsa villa de Esil, villa de Son et ipsa villa de Ordac et ipsa villa de Issavari cum hoc totum que habetis et habere debetis, et ipso monasterio de Sancti Petri in Anavi, cum ipso honore quem habetis in ipso Vallat et habere debetis, et ipso monasterio de Sancti Petri ad Burgal, cum suo honore hoc quem ibi habetis et habere debetis, et cum ipsas parrochias de Archalis et Sancti Petri de Malezas, ipso monasterio cum toto suo honore quod ibi habetis et habere debetis, et cum ipso castro de Petra bruna et ipso castro de Reguart. Et advenit ad me, Artallus, de genitore meo per qualicumque voces et ad me, Lucia, per meum decimum sive per qualecumque voces. Et est hec omnia in comitatu Paliarensis. Et afrontat hec omnia de totas partes infra iam dicto comitatum ; et est manifestum hec omnia. Et si nos, venditores et commutatores, aut nullusque homo venerit de omnia iam dicta ad irrumpendum, non hoc valeat vendicare, sed componat aut componamus hec omnia iam dicta in duplo et cum omni sua melioracione; et in antea firma permaneat ista carta iam dicta modo vel omnique tempore et non sit disrupta. Facta ista carta VII idus aprilis anno IV regnante Philippo, rege. Sig+num Artalli. Sig+num Lucia, qui ista carta fecimus et testes firmare rogavimus. Sig+num Bertran Atonis. Sig+num baroni Atonis. Sig+num Gido Atoni. Sig+num Giglem Arnal. Sig+num Ponç Mir. Sig+num Rodlant Ricolf. Sig+num Petro Radolf. Sig+num Remon Giglem. Sig+num Bernad baron. Sig+num Arnall Mir de Tost. Sig+num Hug Mir. Sig+num Alaman Altemir. Martinus, presbiter, rogatus scripsit et sub die et anno quo supra.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Charter of sale by count Artau and his wife Lucia to count Raymond and Valencia of various <i>castros</i>.&nbsp; Artau, count of upper Pallars, and Raymond IV, count of lower Pallars, are first cousins (Bonnassie, 2.613), and rivals in a lengthy civil war, in which Artal usually prevailed (Bonnassie, 615-18). &nbsp;Lucia is a sister of Almodis, countess of Barcelona. &nbsp;&nbsp;<i>Castrum</i> is the administrative district around and including a fortified castle.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior</i>, ed. F.M. Rosell (Barcelona, 1945), 1.60-61, #46.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>April 7, 1064