---
letter_id: "25913"
title: "A letter to Dod of Eroles"
ititle: "a letter to dod of eroles"
ltr_date: "April 1061-1108"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-09-15"
modified: "2016-09-15"
url: "/letter/25913.html"
senders:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 25912
    name: Dod of Eroles
    iname: dod of eroles
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of God.&nbsp; This is the agreement made between count Raymond and countess Valencia and Dod, baron of Erola, and his brother Oliver.&nbsp; Oliver agreed to count Raymond that he would hold his allod as they (sic) have it today in his stewardship against all men or women.&nbsp; And for this said stewardship they agree to one reception of 20 focages and three sesters of wine and 1 pig worth 6 silver coins and 10 sesters of barley and 10 of oats; and they would give him this each year.&nbsp; This agreement was made in the month of April, during the reign of king Philip.&nbsp; Sign+ of count Raymond. Sign+ of countess Valencia.&nbsp; Sign+ of Dod and Oliver.&nbsp; And if count Raymond should die, they would hold and keep this said agreement to his son to whom he had left his honor or designated.&nbsp; Sign+ of Eriman Radolf.&nbsp; Sign+ of Ramon Guirbert.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Dei nomine. Hec est conveniencia que est facta inter Raimundo comite et Valencia comitissa et Dod, baron de Erolas, et Oliver, suo fratre. Convenit Raimundo comite ad Oliver que teneat suum alode que hodie habent in sua baiulia contra totos homines vel feminas. Et per ista baiulia iam dicta conveniunt ad eum uno recepto de xx fogazas et tres ss. de vino et 1 porc de VI argenteos et x ss. de ordio et x de avena ; et hoc donent ad illum per unoquisque anno. Facta conveniencia in mense aprili, anno regnante Philippo rege. Sig+num Raimundo co­mite. Sig+num Valencia comitissa. &nbsp;Sig+num Dod et Oliver. Et, si de Raimundo comite minus venerit, sic teneant et attendant ista conve­niencia iam dicta ad suum filium ad quem suam honorem dimiserit vel dubitaverit. Sig+num Eriman Radolf. Sig+num Ramon Guirbert.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Agreement between the count and countess and Dod, baron of Erola and his brother Oliver, putting their honor under comital protection, promising to give housing with various provisions.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior</i>, ed. F.M. Rosell (Barcelona, 1945),&nbsp;&nbsp;1.93, #80.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>April 1061-1108