---
letter_id: "25920"
title: "A letter from viscountess Adalgard"
ititle: "a letter from viscountess adalgard"
ltr_date: "c.1066"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-09-15"
modified: "2017-01-20"
url: "/letter/25920.html"
senders:
  - id: 25991
    name: Adalgard, viscountess
    iname: adalgard, viscountess
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25618
    name: Raymond IV, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond iv, count of pallars
    type: people
  - id: 25615
    name: Valencia of Tost
    iname: valencia of tost
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>This is the agreement which viscountess Adalgard and my son Arnal made with count Raymond and your wife countess Valencia and your children whom you, Raymond and Valencia, would designate.&nbsp; And about that <i>castrum</i> of Tenriu with its boundaries, we keep it for you, I viscountess Adalgard and my son Arnal, for you count Raymond and said countess Valencia, and your abovementioned children in such a way that you would have entry and exit into that castle of Tenriu and waging war and service, military and cavalry, and you would have reception in that castle once each year.&nbsp; And that forenamed reception includes:&nbsp; one pig and one sheep and 60 focages and 6 sesters of wine and one measure of barley and another of oats, and in our other honor which we have and acquired before, help and support against all men with your counsel.&nbsp; And I Adalgard and my son Arnal [hold] the above in such a way that we would not make peace with Artal outside of your order and counsel, count Raymond.&nbsp; And if Gerbert should come out of captivity, let him be in that agreement with the count as his mother and Arnal made; and if Gerbert did not wish to do it, he would not have power over that castle of Tenriu until he did so.&nbsp; And from this hour forward, we shall be faithful to you by faith without deception, that you have today and would acquire in the future by our counsel, as it ought to be to one’s lord to whom he entrusts himself. This agreement was made on the 3rd kalends of May.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Hec est conveniencia que facit Adalgard vicescomitissa et filium meum Arnal Regimundo comite et ad tua muliere Valença comitissa et ad filiis tuis ad que tu Remon et Valenza dubitaveris. Et de ipso castro de Tenriu cum suos terminos adtendimus ad tes ego Adalgard vicesco­mitissa et filium meum Arnal ad te, Regimundo comite, et ad Valenza comitissa iam dicta, et ad tuos infantes iam suprascriptos in tale videlicet racione, quod abeatis in ipsum castellum de Tenriu intrare et exire et guirigare et servicium et hostem et cavalgada, et abeatis in ipsum cas­tellum per unumquisque anno 1 recetum. Et est ipsum recetum pronominatum : 1 porcum et 1 moltone et LX fogazas et VI ss. de vino et 1 modio de ordium et alium de avena, et in ipsa nostra alia honore que habemus et in antea acaptaremus apud vestrum consilium adiutorium et valimentum contra totos homines. Et ego Adalgard et filius meus Arnal &nbsp;iam suprascriptos in tale racione, que apud Artallum non habeamus fine extra tuo mandamentum et tuo consilium de te, Ragimundo comite. Et si Gerbert exierit de preso, in ipsa conveniencia stia ad ipsum comite quomodo facit sua mater et Arnal; et, si Gerbert hoc non voluerit facere, non habeat potestate de ipsum castellum de Tenriu, stroque hoc facia. Et de ista hora in antea fideles ti seremus per fide extra tuo engan, quod hodie habes et in antea accaptaras per nostrum consilium, quomodo hoc debet esser ad suo seniore ad quod si comenda. Facta ista convenenza 111 kal. mai.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Agreement on the <i>castrum</i> of Tenriu with housing and provision once a year. Gerbert is another son of Adalgard. <i>Castrum</i> is the administrative district around and including a fortified castle.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior</i>, ed. F.M. Rosell (Barcelona, 1945), 1.114, #110.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1066