---
letter_id: "25927"
title: "A letter from Raymond of Pallars"
ititle: "a letter from raymond of pallars"
ltr_date: "1055, March 16"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-09-22"
modified: "2021-03-31"
url: "/letter/25927.html"
senders:
  - id: 25926
    name: Raymond, count of Pallars
    iname: raymond, count of pallars
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25666
    name: Arnau Mir of Tost
    iname: arnau mir of tost
    type: people
  - id: 25924
    name: Arsenda
    iname: arsenda
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>&nbsp;In the name of Christ.&nbsp; I Raymond, count of Pallars, am the seller to you, Arnau and your wife Arsenda, buyers.&nbsp; By this document of sale I sell you half that <i>castrum </i>of Areng with that town and its boundaries and its adjacencies which pertain to that <i>castrum </i>of Areng.&nbsp; And all the above came to me, Raymond, from my father and my mother and certain rights.&nbsp; And all the above abut:&nbsp; in the east the boundaries of St. Eularia or Espills, in the south the boundary of Montagnana, in the west the boundaries of Curnudela or Pedros, and in the north the boundary of Betessa or Alarone. Whatever is included within these abutments and whatever these boundaries contain, I sell you half of that <i>castrum </i>with its allods, cultivated or uncultivated lands, vineyards,&nbsp; vines, meadows, pastures, woods, open lands, waters, viaducts or returns of waters, cliffs or hills, straight and deserted, and in all these and everything that one can say or name.&nbsp; Whatever the above <i>castrum</i> holds today and ought to hold, with its exits and regresses, I sell to you from that abovenamed <i>castrum </i>or from all the abovenamed, half of the whole for the price of two thousand solidos in equivalent things (in res valentem) and that is manifest.&nbsp; All the aforesaid I by my right hand over to your rule and power to be most fully your own without any reservation, on the condition namely that you and your posterity hold it in my service and that of my posterity.&nbsp; And if we or anyone opposes this document of sale to break it, he will not make good his claim, but must pay you double with all improvements; and this document shall always remain firm and untroubled henceforth.&nbsp; Enacted &nbsp;on the 17th kalends of April in the 24th year of the reign of king Henry.&nbsp; Sign+ of Raymond, count by the grace of God, who had this document made and asked witnesses to sign it.&nbsp; Sign+ of Guitard William.&nbsp; Sign+ of Garcia Eiz.&nbsp; Sign+ of Mir Borrel. Sign+ of Arnal Unla.&nbsp; Sign+ of Dalmad Guisad. Sign+ of Erral Bernard. Sign+ of Berenguer Annard. Sign+ of Arnal Dalmaz.&nbsp; +Arnal, priest, wrote this as asked on the day+ and year above.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In Christi nomine. Ego Remundus, comite Palariense, vinditor sum vobis, ad Arnal et coniux tua Arsend, emptores. Per hanc scriptura vendicionis me[e] vindo vobis ipsa medietate de ipso castro de Aregno cum ipsa vila et cum suis terminis et cum suis aiacenciis qui ad ipso castro de Aregno pertine[n]t. Et advenit ad me, Reimundo, hec omnia suprascripta de genitore meo vel de genitrice mea sive per quascumque voces. Et affrontat supradicta hec omnia: a parte orientis in terminis de Sancta Eularia vel de Espills, et de meridie in termino de Montagnana, et de occiduo in terminos de Curnudela vel de Pedros, a parte, vero, circi in termino de Betessa vel de Alarone. Quantum infra istas affrontaciones includunt et isti termini continent, sic vindo vo­bis ipsa medietate de ipsum castrum suprascriptum cum suis alaudibus, terras cultas vel incultas, vineas, vinealis, pratis, pascuis, silvis, garricis, aquis, aquarum vieductibus vel reductibus, rocha vel pugos quam directos et ermos, et in omnibus et in omnia quicquid dici vel nominari potest homo. Quantum supradictum castrum hodie tenet et tenere debet, cum exiis et regressiis carum, sic vindo vobis de ipso castro suprascripta vel de ista omnia suprascripta ipsa medietate ab integrum propter precium solidos duo milia in res valentem, et est manifestum. Quem, vero, predicta hec omnia de meo iure in vestro trado dominio et potestate ad vestrum plenissimum proprium sine ulla reservacione, in ea videlicet racione, ut teneatis vos et posterita vestra in servicio meo et de posterita mea. Quod si nos aut aliquis homo qui contra hanc ista scriptura vindicionis venerit pro inrumpendum, non hoc valeat vindicare, sed componat vobis in dublo cum omni sua inmelioracione; et in antea ista scriptura semper maneat firma [et] inconvulsa. Actum est hoc XVII kalendas aprilis anno XXIIII regni Henrici, regis.&nbsp; Sig+num Reimundus, gracia Dei comes, qui ista scriptura fecit et testes firmare rogavit.&nbsp; Sig+num Guitard Guillem.&nbsp; Sig+num Garcia Eiz.&nbsp; Sig+num Mir Borrel.&nbsp; Sig+num Arnal Unla.&nbsp; Sig+num Dalmad Guisad.&nbsp; Sig+num Errall Bernard.&nbsp; Sig+num Berenguer Annard.&nbsp; Sig+num Arnall Dalmaz.&nbsp; +Arnallus, sacer, rogatus scripsit die + et anno quod supra.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This charter records a sale by Raymond, count of Pallars, to Arnau and Arsenda for half the <i>castrum</i> of Areng, on condition of their continuing service to him.&nbsp; A <i>castrum</i>&nbsp;is an administrative district including a castle with a fortification.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Liber Feudorum Maior</i>,&nbsp;1.123-24, #123.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1055, March 16