---
letter_id: "25935"
title: "A letter to Ollemjar and Cheno"
ititle: "a letter to ollemjar and cheno"
ltr_date: "1037, September 6"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-10-18"
modified: "2021-03-31"
url: "/letter/25935.html"
senders:
  - id: 25666
    name: Arnau Mir of Tost
    iname: arnau mir of tost
    type: people
    url: /people/25666.html
  - id: 25924
    name: Arsenda
    iname: arsenda
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25924.html
receivers:
  - id: 25934
    name: Ollemjar and Cheno
    iname: ollemjar and cheno
    type: people
    url: /people/25934.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I, Arnau Mir and my spouse Arsenda are the donators to you Ollemjar and your wife Cheno.&nbsp; By this document of our gift we give you those allods which are in the <i>castrum</i> of Ager.&nbsp; They are lands and vineyards, homes, villages, gardens, orchards, flax-grounds, and sugar-canes [kanamares], cultivated or uncultivated areas, with every kind of tree of whatever kind.&nbsp; And it came to us from our parents and from seizure and by whatever rights.&nbsp; And all the above has these abutments in the east in Noguera, in the south in the ridge de Nos, in the west in Nogerola, and in the north in the ridge of Ares.&nbsp; As much … we give you all the above in its entirety, with their exits or entrances … as your own allod.</p><p>This charter of donation was made on the 8th ides of September in the 7th year of the reign of king Henry.&nbsp; Sign+ of Arnau Mir.&nbsp; Sign+ of Arsenda, we who ordered this charter of donation, had it written, and signed it with our hands.&nbsp; Sign+ of Rembal Mir.&nbsp; Sign+ of Od Guisal.&nbsp; These are the witnesses.&nbsp; Raymond, priest, wrote it as asked on the day + and year above.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine Domini. Ego Arnallus Mironi et conjux ejus Arsendia donatores sumus tibi Ollemar et uxori tua cheno. Per hanc scripturam donacionis nostre donamus nos vobis ipsos alludios qui sunt in kastrum de Ager. Id sunt terras vel vineas, kasas, kasalibus, ortis, ortalibus, linares, et kanamares, cultum vel eremum, cum omni genere arborum de qualisque generibus. Et advenit nobis de parentorum sive de aprisione vel per nullasque voces. Et abet afrontaciones ista hec omnia suprascripta de parte orientis in Noguera, de meridie in sera de Nos, de occiduo in Nogerola, de parte vero circii in sera de Ares. Quantum... sic donamus nos vobis ista hec omnia suprascripta totum ab integrum, cum exio vel regresio earum... ad vestrum proprium alloudium...</p><p>Facta ista karta donacionis VIII idus September anno VII regnante Ezenricho rege. Sig+num Arnal Mir. Sig+num Arsendis, qui ista karta donacionis mandavimus scribere fecimus et cum manus nostras firmamus. Sig+num Rembal Mir. Sig+num Od Guisal: isti sunt testes. Reimundus, sacerdos, rogatus, scripsit sub+die et anno quod supra.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The document records a gift of certain allods from the viscounts to a married couple.&nbsp; The seizures mentioned are presumably from Saracens, the source of much of Arnau’s territory.&nbsp; <i>Castrum</i> is an administrative unit including a fortified castle.&nbsp; There are lacunae in the text.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Pedro Sanahuja, <i>Historia de la Villa de Ager</i> (Barcelona:&nbsp; Editorial Seráfica, 1961), 318, #5.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1037, September 6