---
letter_id: "25947"
title: "A letter from Eva"
ititle: "a letter from eva"
ltr_date: "1047, August 11"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2016-10-18"
modified: "2021-11-20"
url: "/letter/25947.html"
senders:
  - id: 25946
    name: Eva
    iname: eva
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 25666
    name: Arnau Mir of Tost
    iname: arnau mir of tost
    type: people
  - id: 25924
    name: Arsenda
    iname: arsenda
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Lord.&nbsp; I, Eva, am the donor to you Arnau de Tost and your spouse Arsenda for that Espluga de Miralles with its boundaries and all rights which I have or ought to have in all the above by whatever rights.&nbsp; I hand this aforesaid over to you and give it into your power to do whatever you wish for the fourth part of that tenth of that parrish of St. Lawrence which you give me and for one piece of a vineyard which you give me in Ager and one ounce in gold.&nbsp; And that is manifest.</p><p>This was enacted on the 4rd ides of August in the 17th year of the reign of king Henry.&nbsp; Sign+ of Eva/Ava who asked that this document be written and witnesses sign it.&nbsp; Sign+ of Miro Mironi.&nbsp; Sign+ of Berengarius Borrell.&nbsp; Sign+ of Gerber Maier.&nbsp; Vitalia, priest, wrote it as asked on the day + and year above.&nbsp; Exabel, priest, inscribed it.&nbsp; Unifred Sall above+.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine Domini. Ego Eva donator sum vobis Arnall de Tost et coniugen tuam Arsendis ipsa Spelunca de Miralges cum suos terminos vel omnes voces que in predicta omnia abeo vel abere debeo per qualicumque voces. Hoc vero predictum trado atque dono in vestra potestate ad facien­dum quodcumque volueritis propter quartam partem de ipsum decimum de ipsa parrochia de Sancti Laurencii que vos mihi donatis vel per unam peciam vinee que mihi donatis in Ager et aput (cum) uncia una valente in auro. Et est manifestum.</p><p>Actum est hoc III idus agusti anno XVII regnante Aianricho rege. Sig+num Ava qui ista scriptura rogavit scribere et testes firmare. Sig+num Miro Mironi. Sig+num Berengarius Borrelli. Sig+num Gerber Maier. Vitalis, sacer, rogitus scripsit et + die et anno prefixo. Exabel, sacer, inscripsit. Unifred Salla sus+.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Eva sells Espluga de Miralles to the viscounts, for a quarter of the tithe of St. Lawrence parrish, part of a vineyard and an ounce of gold.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Manuscript source:</h2><p>Pedro Sanahuja, <i>Historia de la Villa de Ager</i> (Barcelona:&nbsp; Editorial Seráfica, 1961), 324, #12.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1047, August 11