---
letter_id: "25990"
title: "A letter to Raymond Berengar"
ititle: "a letter to raymond berengar"
ltr_date: "1112, February 3"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-01-09"
modified: "2021-12-03"
url: "/letter/25990.html"
senders:
  - id: 25988
    name: Gerberga of Arles
    iname: gerberga of arles
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 25687
    name: Raymond Berenguer III
    iname: raymond berenguer iii
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>We wish to bring to the notice of all men that I, Gerberga, countess of Arles, hand over in marriage to you, Raymond Berengar, count, my daughter, Douce by name, with all my honor and that honor that was count Gerbert’s, father of the girl, so that you might have and possess it, you and your children, your progeny and posterity, for all time without any hindrance of opposition, namely Provence, which I have and ought to have, and the county of Gévaudan and the viscounty of Carlad, and every honor I have in the county of Rouergue, as it was Gerbert’s, as he had and ought to have it, and I, countess Gerberga, have and ought to have.&nbsp; All the aforenamed came to me, countess Gerberga, partly by right of my parents, partly by the generosity/gift of my husband count Gerbert.&nbsp; Surely if anyone tried to break this gift, he could not, but must pay all the above doubly, and this would always remain undisturbed.&nbsp; Enacted on the 3rd nones of February in the 4th year of the reign of king Louis.&nbsp; Sign+ of&nbsp; countess Gerberga, I who made this donation and signed it and asked the subscribed witnesses to sign.&nbsp; Sign+ of Gaufré Porcelleti.&nbsp; Sign+ of Bernard Bertrand.&nbsp; Sign+ of Ollabert of Canillac.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p><span>Ad cunctorum noticiam hominum deducere volumus quod ego, Gerberga, comitissa Arelatensis, trado tibi, Raimundo Berengarii, comiti filiam meam in coniugium, nomine Dulcem, cum omni honore meo et cum illo honore qui fuit Girberti, comitis, patris puelle, ut habeatis et possideatis vos et filii vestri, progenies atque posteritas vestra, omni tem­pore absque alicuius contrarietatis obstaculo, nominatim Provinciam, quam ibi habeo et habere debeo, et comitatum Gavallanensem et vicecomitatum Carladensem et omnem honorem quem habeo in comitatu Rutense, sicut fuit Girberti, comitis, et habuit et habere debuit, et ego, comitissa Gerberga, habeo et habere debeo. Advenerunt, autem, mihi comitisse Gerberge, prescripta omnia, partim voce parentum meorum partim largicione viri mei Girberti, comitis. Hanc, nimirum, largicionem si quis disrumpere tentaverit, non valeat, sed componat in duplo prelibata omnia, et hoc semper maneat inconvulsum. Actum est hoc III nonas februarii anno IIII regni Ledovici, regis. Sig+num Gerberge comitisse, que hanc donacionem feci et firmavi testibusque subscriptis firmare rogavi. Sig+num Gaufredi Porcelleti. Sig+num Bernardi Bertrandi. Sig+num Olleberti de Canilag. &nbsp;</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The countess gives her daughter Douce in marriage to the count of Barcelona along with the lands she had made over to her.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i><span>Liber Feudorum Maior</span></i><span>, 2.346, #876.</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1112, February 3