---
letter_id: "26009"
title: "A letter to the Public"
ititle: "a letter to the public"
ltr_date: "c.1113"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-06-16"
modified: "2021-04-04"
url: "/letter/26009.html"
senders:
  - id: 43
    name: Clementia of Burgundy, countess of Flanders
    iname: clementia of burgundy, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/43.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Let it be known by all the faithful as much in the future as in the present, that I Clemence Countess of Flanders, for the souls of my lord Robert and of my two sons, and for the remedy of my soul, conceded to the church of Anchin that the brothers of the same church could make a canal from the villa which is called Lalain, up to the place which is called Keuirons of such a kind that ships would be able to go through it as freely as they previously went through the Scarpe. But if such a canal is not made, this approval, which was made under the testimony of legitimate men or scabini of Douai, will be undone. However if the previously mentioned canal is made, they should withdraw the first course of the water all the way up to the mill house below the periphery of this same monastery site. So that this (donation) remains secure, we affirm it by my seal and the assent of the undersigned witnesses. &nbsp;(Translation by Penelope Ann Adair)</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Notum sit omnibus fidelibus tam praesentibus quam futuris, quod ego Clementia Flandrensium comitissa, pro animabus domini mei Roberti et duorum filiorum meorum, et pro remedio animae meae, Aquicinensi ecclesiae concesserim, ut fratres ejusdem aecclesiae a villa quae dicitur Lalain, usque ad locum qui vocatur Keuirons tale fossatum faciant, per quod naves tam libere quam prius per Scarpum, transire valeant. Quod si tale fossatum non fuerit, et hoc comprobatum sub testimonio legitimorum virorum et scabinorum Duacensium fuerit, irritum fiet. Facto vero fossato ut praedictum est, ipsius aquae priorem cursum, usque ad molendinum infra ambitum ejusdem cenobii situm, deducant. Hoc ut ratum permaneat, sigillo meo et subtersignatorum testium astipulatione firmamus.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The countess gives lands to the abbey of Anchin near Douai so they can build a canal, with restrictions if the canal is not built. &nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Michele Courtois, "Chartes originates anterieures at 1 121, conservees dans le departement du Nord," Master's thesis, University of Nancy, 1981, n. 059.936, cited by Penelope Ann Adair,&nbsp;"Ego et uxor mea ... :" <em>Countess Clemence and Her Role in the Comital Family and in Flanders</em> ( 1092-11 33), dissertation at UCSB, 1993, who also provided the translation.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1113