---
letter_id: "26016"
title: "A letter of donation"
ititle: "a letter of donation"
ltr_date: "1106, September 15"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-07-04"
modified: "2017-07-13"
url: "/letter/26016.html"
senders:
  - id: 43
    name: Clementia of Burgundy, countess of Flanders
    iname: clementia of burgundy, countess of flanders
    type: woman
  - id: 26015
    name: Robert II, count of Flanders
    iname: robert ii, count of flanders
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the holy and individual Trinity.&nbsp; It should be held fixed with contemporaries through generations of the faithful by the whole future succession that I, Robert, by the grace of God count of Flanders, and my wife Clementia, [we] have freely given a sheep-run, Bonhem, with all the land that might be added to it, for the remedy of our souls to Saint Mary in Bourbourg to be held in perpetuity, with the added witness of the subscribed:&nbsp; Bernard, chaplain; Libert, priest; and Theoderic/Thierry, notary; Thibaut of Aria; Reinger, seneschal, Odolf, chamberlain; Rodolf his son; Vroolf, castellan of Bergis; Lambert of Albi; Baldwin of Gravelines; Godescalc, his son.&nbsp; That this might remain untroubled through time, I have fortified it with the impression of my seal.&nbsp; Enacted at Bergis, in the 1106th year of the lord, 17th kalends of October.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine sancte et individue Trinitatis. Ratum teneat cum modernis tota fidelium per generationes futura successio, quod ego Robertus, Dei gratia Flandrensium comes, et uxor mea Clementia, bercariam Bonhem cum tota terra que superaccresci poterit, pro nostro nostrorumque remedio sancte Marie in Bourbourg in perpetuum habendam, adhibito subscriptorum testimonio, libere donavimus: Bernardi, capellani; Liberti, presbyteri; et Theoderici, notarii; Tedbaldi de Aria; Reingeri, dapiferi; Odolfi, camerarii; Rodolfi, filii eius; Vroolfi, castellani de Bergis; Lamberti Albi; Balduini de Greveninghe; Godescalci, filii eius. Quod ut inconvulsum in evum permaneat, sigilli mei impressione corroboravi. Actum est Bergis, anno Domini M°. C°. VI°, xvii° kalendas Octobris.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The count and countess give a sheeprun at Bonhem to the abbey at Bourbourg, with all the land that might be added to it. &nbsp;Though the letter is in Robert's name, Clementia is a co-donor.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Un cartulaire de l’abbaye de Notre Dame de Bourbourg</i>, ed. Ignace de Coussemaker (Lille:&nbsp; Cucoulombier, 1882-91), 1.3, #3; also in&nbsp;F. Vercauteren,&nbsp;<i>Actes des Comtes de Flandres</i>, 1071-1128 [Brussels:&nbsp; Palais des Academies 1938], #35, p.101-02.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1106, September 15