---
letter_id: "26023"
title: "A letter of donation"
ititle: "a letter of donation"
ltr_date: "1110 "
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-07-04"
modified: "2021-11-26"
url: "/letter/26023.html"
senders:
  - id: 43
    name: Clementia of Burgundy, countess of Flanders
    iname: clementia of burgundy, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/43.html
  - id: 26015
    name: Robert II, count of Flanders
    iname: robert ii, count of flanders
    type: people
    url: /people/26015.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the holy and individual Trinity.&nbsp; We wish it known to the present and the future that I, Robert, count of Flanders, and countess Clementia, my wife, have built a house of the nuns of Faumont for the remission of our sins and the salvation of our souls, and we have given the nuns serving God there two properties of land and the tithe in Pevela from new land, cultivated and to be cultivated, and the tithe of linen pertaining to our right, and also new land in Rihol and every tithe of the gardens in Orchies, also the land of Petriholt with its tithe.&nbsp; But lest anyone presume the temerity to breach this, let the witness of our appended seal be attended to.&nbsp; This was enacted in the 1110th year of the Lord before these witnesses:&nbsp; Bernard, chaplain, Theodore/Thierry, notary; Thibaut of Aria; Reinger, seneschal; William, castellan; William, seneschal; Bernold of Insula; Gerard, castellan of Cassel, and several others.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine sancte et individue Trinitatis. Notum esse volumus tam presentibus quam futuris quod ego Robertus, comes Flandrie, et Clementia comitissa, uxor mea, domum sanctimonialium de Faumonte pro remissione peccatorum nostrorum, et salute animarum nostrarum construximus, et sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo servientibus duos mansos terre et decimam in Pevela de nova terra tam culta quam colenda, et decimationem lini ad ius nostrum pertinentem, necnon novam terram in Rihol, et omnem decimam ortorum in Orchies, terram etiam de Petriholt cum decimatione sua dedimus. Sed ne quis temerarius infringere hoc presumat, appositum sigilli nostri testimonium attendat. Actum est autem hoc anno Domini M°. C°. X°, coram his testibus: Bernardo, capellano; Theoderico, notario; Thebaldo de Aria; Reingero,&nbsp;dapifero; Willelmo, castellano; Willelmo, dapifero; Bernoldo de Insula; Gerardo, castellano de Cassel, et aliis pluribus.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The count and countess give land and various tithes to the home of the nuns of Faumont which they founded.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Un cartulaire de l’abbaye de Notre Dame de Bourbourg</i>, ed. Ignace de Coussemaker (Lille:&nbsp; Cucoulombier, 1882-91), 1.7, #9;&nbsp;F. Vercauteren,&nbsp;<i>Actes des Comtes de Flandres</i>, 1071-1128 [Brussels:&nbsp; Palais des Academies 1938], #46, p.122-23.</p><p></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1110 