---
letter_id: "26022"
title: "The record of a donation"
ititle: "the record of a donation"
ltr_date: "1110, July 27"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-07-04"
modified: "2017-07-13"
url: "/letter/26022.html"
senders:
  - id: 43
    name: Clementia of Burgundy, countess of Flanders
    iname: clementia of burgundy, countess of flanders
    type: woman
  - id: 26015
    name: Robert II, count of Flanders
    iname: robert ii, count of flanders
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 26017
    name: The faithful
    iname: the faithful
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the holy and individual Trinity.&nbsp; Let no one of the faithful present to whom this affair pertains be unaware that Folquin son of Malger by surname Gross gave up the whole land which he had in fief or allod to count Robert, at Messines, with these witnesses:&nbsp; Reinger, seneschal; Thibaut of Aria; Baldwin, chamberlain, Odulf of Cassel; Bernold of Insula.&nbsp; Not much later, indeed, said count R[obert] and his wife, C[lementia], freely gave that land, for the salvation of their souls to St. Mary in Bourbourg to be possessed in perpetuity, with the subscribed wintesses, at Arras:&nbsp; John, bishop of Cassel; Godfrey, bishop of Amiens; Odo, bishop of Cambray; Lambert, abbot of St. Bertin; Gildewin, abbot of Anchin; Conon of Insula; Reiner, notary; Hugo, castellan of Cambray; Hugo the younger of Lille; Alelmo, of Arras.&nbsp; &nbsp;Lest the benefit of this donation suffer any harm, in order to preserve the truth, I Robert, count of Flanders, supported the witness of my seal. &nbsp;Enacted at Arras, in the 1110th &nbsp;year of the lord’s incarnation, 3rd indiction, 6th kalends of August.&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>&nbsp;In nomine sancte et individue Trinitatis. Nullus ignoret fidelium ad quem presens spectat negocium, quod Folquinus, Malgeri, Grossi cognomine, filius, terram totam quam habebat (in) feodum sive allodia, comiti Roberto, Mecinis, hiis testibus ultro resignavit: Reingero, dapifero; Tedbaldo de Aria; Balduino, camerario;&nbsp;Odulfo de Cassel; Bernoldo de Insula. Non multum vero post, prefatus comes R(obertus), et uxor sua, C(lementia), eamdem terram, pro anime sue suorumque salute, sancte Marie in Broburg perpetuo possidendam, subscriptis adhibitis testibus, Atrebati, libere donaverunt: Iohanne, Morinorum episcopo; Godefrido, Ambianensi episcopo; Odone, Cameracensi episcopo; Lamberto, abbate de sancto Bertino; Gildewino, Aquicinctensi abbate; Conone de Insula; Reinero, notario; Hugoni, castellano Cameracensi; Hugone, iuniore, de Lillers; Alelmo, Atrebatensi. Huius igitur donationis beneficium ne in futuro aliquod pateretur ex ambiguitate detrimentum, pro veritate conservanda, ego Robertus Flandrensium comes,&nbsp;sigilli mei hoc subnexui testimonium. Acta Atrebati, anno dominice incarnationis M°. C°. X°, indictione IIIa, VI°, kalendas Augusti.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The count and countess give the abbey of Bourbourg a land held from them in fief and given up to them by Folquin.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Un cartulaire de l’abbaye de Notre Dame de Bourbourg</i>, ed. Ignace de Coussemaker (Lille:&nbsp; Cucoulombier, 1882-91), 1.6-7, #8; also in&nbsp;F. Vercauteren,&nbsp;<i>Actes des Comtes de Flandres</i>, 1071-1128 [Brussels:&nbsp; Palais des Academies 1938], #43, p.118-19.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1110, July 27