---
letter_id: "26031"
title: "A letter of agreement"
ititle: "a letter of agreement"
ltr_date: "1112"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-07-12"
modified: "2017-07-12"
url: "/letter/26031.html"
senders:
  - id: 43
    name: Clementia of Burgundy, countess of Flanders
    iname: clementia of burgundy, countess of flanders
    type: woman
  - id: 26020
    name: Baldwin VII
    iname: baldwin vii
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the holy and individual Trinity.&nbsp; I Baldwin, by the grace of God count of Flanders, with my mother Clementia, make known that on that day that we gave his land back to Walter of Hesdin, we retained the abbey of St. Silvin that was founded at Auchy in honor of God, as one from the abbeys of our land altogether in our own protection.&nbsp; Whence that Walter, having touched the holy relics in our presence swore that whatever his uncle Ingelran had conferred on the church of Auchy and whatever land he had received from us on that day that the church possessed, he would permit it to possess peacefully.&nbsp; Moreover he affirmed that he would defend that church from attackers and would increase the things of that church.&nbsp; This grant was made by that Walter in our court at St. Omer, in the 1112th year of the lord’s incarnation, 5th indiction, on the ides of February, with us and many others witnessing, whose subscriptions are documented:&nbsp; William, count of Ponthieu, Robert of Béthune, Baldwin his son, Host butler, Baldwin chamberlain, William castellan of St. Omer, Roger castellan of Lille, Gerard castellan of Cassel, Adam of Voormezeele, Robert nephew of Roger of the city of Lille, Thibaut of Ypres, Anselm of Gokes, Robert of Ferives, Wido of Asli, Alelm seneschal of Hesdin, Hugo of Grigni, Anselm of Herin, Baldwin of Coucy, John son of Wazelin, Alelm his brother, Hugo of Englos, Laivold of Folces, Hugo son of Winold, Baldwin son of Aselin, Hoylard of Auchy, Rainier of St. Quentin, Droard of Wail, Warin brother of Robert of Ferives.</p><p>These things among others the church of Auchy held on that day and these Ingelran of Hesdin gave in alms to that church:&nbsp; half of Winkingehen, half of Hubi, fields, woods and waters, ploughland of&nbsp; Loisun near Heemunt, half the town of Montigny, fields and forests, a quarter part of Lesin. &nbsp;With witnesses present, David, Odo priest, Oylard of Auchy, Radulf provost, Walter of Verdey and others.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine sancte et individue Trinitatis. Ego Balduinus, Dei gratia, Flandrensis comes, cum Clementia matre mea, notum facio quod ipsa die qua Walterio Hisdinensi terram suam reddidimus, abbatiam Sancti Silvini que apud Alchiacum in honore Dei fundata est, tamquam unam de abbatiis terre nostre in propria advocatia omnino retinuimus. Unde ipse Walterus, tactis sacrosanctis reliquiis in presentia nostra juravit quod quicquid avunculus suus Ingelrannus ecclesie Alchiacensi contulit, et quicquid eadem die qua ipse terram suam a nobis suscepit predicta ecclesia possedit, quiete possidere permitteret. Insuper affirmavit se eandem ecclesiam ab infestantibus defensaturum, et ecclesie ejusdem res ampliaturum. Hec concessio facta est ab eodem Waltero in curia nostra apud Sanctum Audomarum, anno dominice incarnationis M°C°XII°, indictione V, idibus februarii, nobis atestantibus et aliis quampluribus quorum subscripta sunt ad testimonium : Willelmus comes Pontivensis, Robertus Bituniensis, Balduinus filius ejus, Host pincerna, Balduinus camerarius, Willelmus castellanus Sancti Audomari, Rogerus castellanus Islensis, Gerardus castellanus Casletensis, Adam de Formesel, Robertus nepos Rogeri castri Islensis, Tebaldus Yprensis, Anselmus de Gokes, Robertus de Ferives, Wido de Asli, Alelmus dapifer de Hisdin, Hugo de Grigni, Anselmus de Herin, Balduinus de Couci, Johannes filius Wazelini, Alelmus frater ejus, Hugo de Englos, Laivoldus de Folces, Hugo filius Winoldi, Balduinus filius Aselini, Hoylardus de Alchi, Rainerus de Sancto Quintino, Droardus de Wail, Warinus frater Roberti de Ferives.</p><p>Hec autem inter cetera ipsa die Alchiacensis ecclesia tenebat et hec in elemosina eidem ecclesie Ingelrannus Hisdinensis dederat : medietatem de Winkingehen, medietatem de Hubi, camporum et silve et aque, culturam de Loysuns juxta Heemunt, de Montigni medietatem ville, camporum et silve, quartam partem de Lesin, presentibus testibus Davide, Odone presbiteris, Oylardo de Alchi, Radulfo preposito, Waltero Viridi cum aliis.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The count and his mother record an agreement with Walter of Hesdin to give his land back to him, while retaining one abbey at Auchy, and Walter swore to leave in peace the church lands, named in detail, including those bestowed by his uncle.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>F. Vercauteren,&nbsp;<i>Actes des Comtes de Flandres</i>, 1071-1128 (Brussels:&nbsp; Palais des Academies 1938),&nbsp;#55, 137-39.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1112