---
letter_id: "26039"
title: "A letter from Engelhard of Lanheim"
ititle: "a letter from engelhard of lanheim"
ltr_date: "c.1200"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-08-01"
modified: "2021-04-21"
url: "/letter/26039.html"
senders:
  - id: 26036
    name: Engelhard of Langheim
    iname: engelhard of langheim
    type: people
    url: /people/26036.html
receivers:
  - id: 26037
    name: Unknown countess
    iname: unknown countess
    type: people
    url: /people/26037.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Brother E[ngelhard], formerly called abbot, now however Christ’s pauper in Langheim,&nbsp;[offers] the prayers of a sinner and a pauper’s service to the illustrious lady, Countess N.&nbsp;Asked by you to write a life of the blessed Abbess Mechthild, I scarcely have the courage&nbsp;to agree, because I know how difficult it is for the words of an unlearned man to please&nbsp;the learned. There are those who want to fix everything according to weight and measure&nbsp;and plan in the manner of God, and to display everything so established; I would have&nbsp;preferred that those men had seized hold of this work and had taken from me the chance&nbsp;and opportunity to bring false information. But because they refuse, occupied with laws&nbsp;and decrees, I who am fond of talking in a rustic manner will undertake the life of the&nbsp;blessed woman, invoking the Holy Spirit, the author of her sanctity, so that he may confer&nbsp;upon me knowledge of the good things he gave her to do. I do not touch on everything of&nbsp;hers, because I do not know everything. For, as you know, I sat with you scarcely one&nbsp;hour, at which time I collected the chapters as they were recited to us. When she was&nbsp;alive, she did not want her things or any others to be known. Although by the Lord’s&nbsp;example she commanded that there be silence concerning her, her virtues were unable to&nbsp;lie hidden, but her strength shouted. May the saint’s piety be present for me, may it help&nbsp;me who is undeserving of her merits, so that if I am displeasing to the masters and wise&nbsp;ones of the world with my writing, I will be pleasing to him for whom the saint proved&nbsp;herself. She who did not want to be praised in life, because she was afraid of it, permits&nbsp;praise of her piety after death, because the pious woman is not afraid.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Dominæ Illustræ a Comitissæ N. Frater E. quondam dictus Abbas, nunc autem pauper&nbsp;Christi in Lanchaim, orationes peccatoris &amp; servitium pauperis. Rogatus a vobis Vitam&nbsp;scribere B. Mathildis Abbatissæ, vix audeo [Col. 0444E] acquiescere, cum sciam difficile&nbsp;doctis indocti verba placere. Qui ad pondus &amp; mensuram &amp; rationem more Dei volunt&nbsp;cuncta constituere, &amp; constituta ostendere, mallem illos arripuisse opus, &amp; mihi&nbsp;calumniandi occasionem vel causam abstulisse. Sed ipsis dedignantibus, &amp; circa Leges&nbsp;vel Decreta occupatis, ego rusticandi studiosus, vitam aggrediar feminæ beatæ, sanctitatis&nbsp;ejus auctorem sanctum invocans Spiritum, ut bona, quæ illi contulit facere, mihi largiatur&nbsp;edicere. At omnia illius non attingo, quia nescio. Nam, ut scitis, vix hora una vobis&nbsp;assedi, qua capitula nobis recitanda collegi. Sed nec ipsa cum viveret, sua vel aliqua sciri&nbsp;voluit; cum exemplo Dominico jubens de se taceri, virtutes latere non possent, sed virtus&nbsp;ipsa clamaret. Adsit mihi pietas Sanctæ, juvet immeritum meritis suis, ut si magistris &amp;&nbsp;sapientibus mundi scribendo displiceo, placeam ei cui se Sancta probavit; quæ in vita&nbsp;laudari noluit, quia timuit; post mortem, quia non timet pia, laudem pietatis admittit.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>A letter written ca. 1200 by the Cistercian Abbot Engelhard of Langheim to an unnamed&nbsp;countess, who had asked him to write a vita of the Augustinian canoness Mechthild of&nbsp;Diessen in Bavaria (d. 1160), who also briefly served as abbess of Edelstetten in Swabia. Engelhard's dedicatory letter to the countess, which is included in manuscripts containing&nbsp;the vita, stresses how little information about Mechthild he had when writing about her&nbsp;life.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Vita, auctore Engelhardo, Ordinis Cisterciensis.&nbsp; Ex antiquis Lectionibus Henrici Canisii. &nbsp;Mathildis, Abbatissa Ordinis Canonicorum Regularium S. Augustini, Dyezzae in Bavaria</em> (B.) &nbsp;BHL Number:&nbsp; 5686 [Col.0444B] &nbsp;(Engelhard of Langheim. <em>Vita B. Mathildis Virginis</em>. Ed. Gottfried Henschen. In&nbsp;<em>Acta Sanctorum</em>, May 7, 436-449. Paris and Rome: Victor Palmé, 1866.)</p><p>Translation: "The life of Mechthild of Diessen (d. 1160), by Engelhard of Langheim," in&nbsp;<em>Noble Society: Five Lives from Twelfth-Century Germany</em>, trans. Jonathan R. Lyon&nbsp;(Manchester University Press, 2017), p. 171. &nbsp;The translation is published here by permission of the author.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1200