---
letter_id: "26059"
title: "A letter to emperor Justinian"
ititle: "a letter to emperor justinian"
ltr_date: "534"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-08-22"
modified: "2017-08-22"
url: "/letter/26059.html"
senders:
  - id: 26057
    name: Amalasuntha
    iname: amalasuntha
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26057.html
receivers:
  - id: 26058
    name: Justinian
    iname: justinian
    type: people
    url: /people/26058.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Until now, most merciful prince, we have put off the disclosure of the death of our son, of glorious memory, so as not to wound the heart of a loving friend with a sorrowful message. But now, with the help of God –who always turns harsh mischance into good fortune — we have chosen to bring to your attention matters over which you may be able to rejoice with us, and share our exultation. It is&nbsp;always pleasing to acknowledge the gifts of divine providence to those who love us.</p><p>We have brought to the sceptre one who is closely connected to us by brotherly kinship, a man who may uphold the royal rank together with us by the strength of his counsel, so that he may be resplendently clothed in the purple glory of his ancestors. In this way the solace of a prudent man may lift up our spirits.</p><p>Join together now your propitious prayers. For just as we eagerly hope that all things will turn out favorably in the empire of Your Beneficence, so we will be the living proof of the kindness that you bestow upon us.</p><p>And so we add the service of a most friendly ambassador to the message which has been sent, and which we trust that you, with your inborn clemency, will look upon as the fulfillment of a vow. By this means, we hope that the peaceful relations which you maintain toward us — and which you continue to uphold for my sake especially — may be extended for the protection of my people.</p><p>For although the concord of princes is always an adornment, yours wholly ennobles me, since whoever harmoniously shares in your glory is made more fully sublime.</p><p>But since everything cannot be adequately settled in the brief space of a letter, we have, in sending our respectful greetings to you, entrusted to our envoys certain appropriate matters to be made known to you verbally. Please be willing to accept these in the accustomed manner of Your Serenity.</p><p>It is agreed then, that I may without any doubt count on you, since we are doing those things that we recognize you have expected us to do, concerning those people you have recommended, in fulfillment of your wishes.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Adeo vobis, clementissime principum, distulimus hactenus indicare filii nostri gloriosae recordationis occasum, ne amantis laederemus animum per tristia nuntiorum: sed nunc iuvante deo, qui consuevit casus asperos in prospera commutare, illa magis elegimus in vestram deferre notitiam, de quibus nobiscum possitis participata exultatione gaudere: iuvat enim divina munera diligentibus confiteri.&nbsp; &nbsp;</p><p>Perduximus ad sceptra virum fraterna nobis proximitate coniunctum, qui regiam dignitatem communi nobiscum consilii robore sustineret, ut et ille avorum suorum purpureo decore fulgeret et animos nostros solacium prudentis erigeret. iungite nunc vota felicia, ut, sicut nos in imperio pietatis vestrae omnia fieri prospera desideranter expetimus, ita nobis favere vestram benivolentiam comprobemus.&nbsp; peracto itaque nuntio, quod vobis pro ingenita clementia credimus esse votivum, addimus etiam gratissimae legationis officium, ut pacem.&nbsp; quam mente semper geritis et iam mihi specialiter retinetis esse collatam, adiectione quoque meorum proteletis. nam licet concordia principum semper deceat, vestra tamen absolute me nobilitat, quando ille redditur amplius excelsus, qui vestrae gloriae fuerit unanimitate coniunctus.</p><p>Sed quoniam epistularum brevitate universa sufficienter nequeunt expediri, salutantes reverentia competenti quaedam legatis nostris verbo vobis insinuanda commisimus, quae consuetudine vestrae serenitatis libenter accipite, ut ab omnibus evidenter possit agnosci quod iuste nobis probamus de vestra mansuetudine polliceri. convenit enim de vobis indubitanter praesumi, quando et nos pro desiderio vestro in his quos commendastis talia facimus, qualia vos sperasse cognovimus.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen announces to the emperor that she has associated her cousin with her as co-ruler. &nbsp;She does not name Theodahad in the letter, but presumably that was part of the message carried by the bearer of the letter.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Actorum Antiquissimorum,</em> XII, Cassiodorus, <em>Variarum</em>, Book X, 1,&nbsp;p. 297. &nbsp;The translation was done by Marcelle Thiebaux, who graciously allowed us to publish it here from <em>The Writings of Medieval Women</em>, (New York: &nbsp;Garland, 1987), 18-19.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>534