---
letter_id: "26064"
title: "A letter to Theodora"
ititle: "a letter to theodora"
ltr_date: "530's"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-08-22"
modified: "2017-08-22"
url: "/letter/26064.html"
senders:
  - id: 26057
    name: Amalasuntha
    iname: amalasuntha
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26057.html
receivers:
  - id: 26063
    name: Empress Theodora
    iname: empress theodora
    type: people
    url: /people/26063.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Since it is characteristic of our way of life to seek those things which are considered to pertain to the glory of pious princes, it is appropriate to venerate you in written words – you who all agree are continually enhanced in your virtues.</p><p>Harmony exists not only between those who are in each others’ presence; indeed, those joined together in the charity of the spirit have an even greater respect for each other.</p><p>For this reason, rendering to the Augusta the affection of a reverent greeting, I hope that when our legates return — those whom we have sent to the most clement and glorious prince — you will make us rejoice in your safety. Your propitious circumstances are as welcome to us as our own. It is essential to make your safety our heartfelt concern. It is well known that we hope for this unceasingly.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Cum propositi nostri sit illa quaerere quae probantur ad gloriam pii principis pertinere, dignum est vos sermone venerari, quos bonis omnibus constat semper augeri. concordia non est sola praesentium: quin immo illi se melius respiciunt, qui animi caritate se coniungunt. atque ideo reddens Augustae reverentiae salutationis affectum spero, ut redeuntibus legatis nostris, quos ad clementissimum et gloriosissimum principem destinavimus, de vestra nos faciatis sospitate gaudere, quia prospera vestra ita nobis grata videntur ut propria et necesse est sospitatem desideranter suscipere, quam nos iugiter constat optare.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen sends greetings to the empress, wishing her good health, perhaps, Thiebaux suggests, during a pregnancy.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i><span>Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Actorum Antiquissimorum,</span></i><span>&nbsp;XII, Cassiodorus,&nbsp;<i>Variarum</i>, Book X, 10,&nbsp;p. 304. &nbsp;The translation was done by Marcelle Thiebaux, who graciously allowed us to publish it here from&nbsp;<i>The Writings of Medieval Women</i>, (New York: &nbsp;Garland, 1987), 22-23.</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>530's