---
letter_id: "26068"
title: "A letter to Justinian"
ititle: "a letter to justinian"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2017-09-30"
modified: "2017-11-13"
url: "/letter/26068.html"
senders:
  - id: 26057
    name: Amalasuntha
    iname: amalasuntha
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26057.html
receivers:
  - id: 26058
    name: Justinian
    iname: justinian
    type: people
    url: /people/26058.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>One may reasonably expect an emperor who is great and lays claim to virtue to assist an orphan child who does not in the least comprehend what is being done, rather than for no cause at all to quarrel with him. For unless a struggle be waged on even terms, even the victory it gains brings no honour. But thou dost threaten Atalaric on account of Lilybaeum, and ten runaways, and a mistake, made by soldiers in going against their enemies, which through some misapprehension chanced to affect a friendly city. Nay! do not thus; do not thou thus, O Emperor, but call to mind that when them wast making war upon the Vandals, we not only refrained from hindering thee, but quite zealously even gave thee free passage against the enemy and provided a market in which to buy the indispensable supplies,[13] furnishing especially the multitude of horses to which thy final mastery over the enemy was chiefly due. And yet it is not merely the man who offers an alliance of arms to his neighbours that would in justice be called their ally and friend, but also the man who actually is found assisting another in war in regard to his every need. And consider that at that time thy fleet had no other place at which to put in from the sea except Sicily, and that without the supplies bought there it could not go on to Libya. Therefore thou art indebted to us for the chief cause of thy victory; for the one who provides a solution for a difficult situation is justly entitled also to the credit for the results which flow from his help. And what could be sweeter for a man, O Emperor, than gaining the mastery over his enemies? And yet in our case the outcome is that we suffer no slight disadvantage, in that we do not, in accordance with the custom of war, enjoy our share of the spoils. And now thou art also claiming the right to despoil us of Lilybaeum in Sicily, which has belonged to the Goths from ancient times, a lone rock, O Emperor, worth not so much as a piece of silver, which, had it happened to belong to thy kingdom from ancient times, thou mightest in equity at least have granted to Atalaric as a reward for his services, since he lent thee assistance in the times of thy most pressing necessity.”</p><p>&nbsp;</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>[[{"fid":"5811","view_mode":"default","fields":{"format":"default","field_file_image_alt_text[und][0][value]":false,"field_file_image_title_text[und][0][value]":false},"type":"media","link_text":null,"attributes":{"class":"panopoly-image-original media-element file-default"}}]]<br>[[{"fid":"5812","view_mode":"default","fields":{"format":"default","field_file_image_alt_text[und][0][value]":false,"field_file_image_title_text[und][0][value]":false},"type":"media","link_text":null,"attributes":{"class":"panopoly-image-original media-element file-default"}}]]</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Procopius reports that Theodatus,&nbsp;son of Amalafrida and nephew of Theoderic, was secretly negotiating to hand over Tuscan lands to Justinian for money and a safe position in Byzantium. &nbsp;Since Amalasuntha's son, Atalaric, was very sick, she looked to Justinian for protection, reminding him how she had supported him in the past. &nbsp;Justinian had written her a threatening letter, upset that she still held the fortress of Lilybaeum and some of his runaway slaves. &nbsp;The gist of his letter, as Procopius reports it, is: &nbsp;"The fortress of Lilybaeum, which is ours,&nbsp;you have taken by force and are now holding, and barbarians, slaves of mine who have run away, you have received and have not even yet decided to restore them to me, and besides all this you have treated outrageously my city of Gratiana, though it belongs to you in no way whatever. Wherefore it is time for you to consider what the end of these things will some day be."</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Procopius <i>History of the Wars</i>, trans. HB Dewing (Loeb Classical Library) Cambridge: &nbsp;Harvard, 1916, repr.2006, V, iii. 17-28.</p><p>&nbsp;</p>