---
letter_id: "26107"
title: "A poem from Baudri"
ititle: "a poem from baudri"
ltr_date: "late 11th-early 12th century"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2018-11-09"
modified: "2021-04-17"
url: "/letter/26107.html"
senders:
  - id: 21270
    name: Baudri, abbot of Bourgueil and archbishop of Dol
    iname: baudri, abbot of bourgueil and archbishop of dol
    type: people
    url: /people/21270.html
receivers:
  - id: 26106
    name: Muriel of Wilton
    iname: muriel of wilton
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26106.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p><span>Past fame would have exalted you enough with us<br></span>but now the grace of conversation exalts,<br>envious fame indeed hid many things about you,<br><span style="background-color: transparent;">which were also to be recited in the trivium.<br></span>I drank in with my eyes and my ears what<br>fame, carping about you, had taken away,<br>O how your words are covered with honeyed delight.<br>O how sweet your voice sounds while you recite!<br>The songs as you recite would be pleasing to a harsh parent,<br>the words suggest a man, the voice was womanly.<br>The suitable placing of words and disciplined sequence&nbsp;<br>have fixed your place now among illustrious poets.<br>At the height of merit, though your age is young,<br>as the form suitable to you would be pleasing for men;<br>nor do you lack nobility of birth or wealth,<br>things which usually hasten to the marriage bed,<br>[but] having scorned the filth of the flesh with your sturdy breast,<br>you love the intention of holy virginity.<br>Letters are supposed to soften strong girls,<br>[but] much learning &nbsp;strengthens your breast,<br>O if only it would come -- &nbsp;that that time would come<br>that I might gain the profits of another conversation.<br>That you, responding, might give the spirit asking many things,<br>and that I, being asked, would respond many things.<br>Meanwhile, let our mutual songs commend us to us,<br>let unspoken faith be the leader and companion,<br>may you be the first to know my secrets,<br>and let me also know your secret.<br>You are already strong, virgin, do what you do, guided by Christ,<br>And now give your greeting back to my greeting.<br>Harsh, I preserve a harsh tone in composing,<br>and the harshness of my wit also gives birth to this.<br>Yet the full meaning diverts my mind,<br>the reading which rich words enrich pleases.<br>But one thing dulls the point of my pen,<br>that it does not know how to enter the homes of girls.<br>No virgin but you has so far received my songs.<br>This paper of ours has greeted noone.<br>We have written to comrades, we have played much among friends,<br>any girl is [more] experienced in playing than I.<br>But you compel me to proceed on the path,<br>and I do not disdain to aim at what you advise.<br>A rich supply of rich wit abounds in you,<br>by which you might lessen my errors.<br>Lessen [them] therefore, do not spare me,<br>and I shall lessen yours, sparing you.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p><span>Olim fama satis te magnificarat apud nos<br></span>Quam modo magnificat gratia colloquii,<br>Fama quidem de te velut invida multa tegebat,<br>Quae recitanda forent in triviis etiam.<br>Ipse meis oculis necnon simul auribus hausi&nbsp; &nbsp;<span class="Apple-tab-span"></span>5<br>De te tricando fama quod abstulerat,<br>O quam mellito tua sunt lita verba lepore!<br>O quam dulce sonat vox tua dum recitas!<br>Carmina dum recitas, duro placitura parenti,<br>Dicta sonant hominem, vox muliebris erat.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;<span class="Apple-tab-span"></span>10<br>Verborum positura decens, seriesque modesta,<br>Te jam praeclaris vatibus inseruit.<br>Ad meriti cumulum cum sit tibi junior aetas,<br>Cum placitura viris sit tibi forma decens,<br>Nec tibi nobilitas genialis opesve deessent,<span class="Apple-tab-span">&nbsp; &nbsp;</span>15<br>Singula quae thalamos accelerare solent,<br>Carnis spurcitia robusto pectore spreta,<br>Propositum sanctae virginitatis amas.<br>Littera multa solet duras mollire puellas,<br>Praedurat pectus littera multa tuum, <span class="Apple-tab-span"> </span><span class="Apple-tab-span"> </span>&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;20<br>O utinam veniat ! Veniat, rogo, terminus ille,<br>Lucrer ut alterius commoda colloquii.<br>Ipsa dares animum respondens plura roganti,<br>Et responderem plura rogatus ego.<br>Interea nobis nos mutua carmina mandent,<span class="Apple-tab-span"> </span> &nbsp;&nbsp;25<br>Duxque comesque &nbsp;suus sit taciturna fides,<br>Tu secretorum sis conscia prima meorum,<br>Sim quoque secreti conscius ipse tui.<br>Jam valeas virgo, fac quod facis, auspice Christo,<br>Moxque valeto meo redde valeto tuum.&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;<span class="Apple-tab-span"></span>30<br>Durus ego durum dictandi servo tenorem,<br>Hoc quoque durities ingenii peperit.&nbsp;&nbsp;<br>Attamen oblectat mentem sententia plena,<br>Lectio quam ditant ditia dicta placet.<br>Porro mei calami res una retundit acumen,<span class="Apple-tab-span">&nbsp;&nbsp;</span>35<br>Quippe puellarum nescit adire domos.<br>Nulla recepit adhuc nisi tu mea carmina virgo.<br>Nulli dixit adhuc cartula nostra vale.<br>Scripsimus ad socios, sat lusimus inter amicos,<br>Expers ludendi quaeque puella mihi.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;4o<br>Sed tu me coges ignotum pergere callem,<br>Nec dedignor ego tendere qua moneas.<br>Divitis ingenii tibi copia dives abundat,<br>Quo potes erratus attenuare meos.<br>Attenues igitur, necnon mihi compatiaris,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 45<br>Et tenuabo tuos compatiendo tibi.</p><p></p><p><span>&nbsp;</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Baudri corresponded with Muriel in poetry, as he did with several other nun-poets, though he claims that he writes only to her.&nbsp; &nbsp;He seems to have met her and heard her recite her poetry which he praises lavishly.&nbsp; &nbsp;He also encourages her in her religious vocation, though her noble birth and wealth might have destined her for marriage</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><span><em>Les OEuvres Poétiques de Baudri de Bourgueil</em><span><em>,</em> ed. Phyllis Abrahams, (Paris: &nbsp;Honoré Champion, 1926, repr. Geneva: &nbsp;Slatkine, 1974) #CXCIX p.256-57.</span></span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>late 11th-early 12th century