---
letter_id: "26102"
title: "A letter from Bishop Nicetius of Trier"
ititle: "a letter from bishop nicetius of trier"
ltr_date: "559-70"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2018-06-07"
modified: "2021-11-25"
url: "/letter/26102.html"
senders:
  - id: 26101
    name: Bishop Nicetius of Trier
    iname: bishop nicetius of trier
    type: people
    url: /people/26101.html
receivers:
  - id: 26100
    name: Chlodosind
    iname: chlodosind
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26100.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>To the most merciful mistress and daughter in Christ, Queen Chlodosind, Nicetius, a Sinner.</p><p>&nbsp;As we see your ambassadors to the kings of the Franks, your brothers, leaving, we are solicitous&nbsp;concerning your prosperity; but from them we have heard these things, in respect of which we&nbsp;confess always to celebrate and even now to celebrate -that is, how great, how lofty, how&nbsp;praiseworthy, how beneficial, how humane and bountiful, how concerned for the poor, how&nbsp;astute in religion, how distinguished among all the people for her conversation, you are: may He&nbsp;who now gives to you an intellect and spirit of wisdom recognize this.</p><p>We rejoice at this -may Christ make us rejoice concerning king Alboin, whom you have,&nbsp;and may He make us exult at his happiness. We are stunned that -though the peoples fear him,&nbsp;the kings give veneration, the powers praise without cease, and even the emperor himself prefers&nbsp;him- he does not hastily seek the remedy of the soul. We read the scripture: “Seek first the&nbsp;kingdom of God and all good things will be added unto you.” Thus I wonder that anyone who&nbsp;shines with fame as he does is zealous to investigate nothing concerning the kingdom of God and&nbsp;the health of his soul; instead he retains and is satisfied with those who rather destroy the soul in&nbsp;Gehenna than lead it to the way of life. They teach that there are two gods, one a father in divine&nbsp;nature, the other a son in divine nature but a creature in status, while scripture says:”I am the&nbsp;savior,’ and there is none before me.’”</p><p>I enjoin upon you, mistress Chlodosind, by the fearful day of judgment, that you both&nbsp;read this letter well and be zealous to show it to him well and frequently, and that you ask him:&nbsp;&nbsp;“Who is the savior? Do they say that the father is the savior, or the son (because they declare that&nbsp;there are two, when there is one, and the other is not)? If they say it’s the son, then the father is&nbsp;not the savior. And if they will say the father, then the son is not the savior, because he is not at&nbsp;all able to save, because he is not the savior. If they say the two are saviors, they will never find&nbsp;this written, except “I and the father are one.” This is the father in the son and with the son and&nbsp;the son in the father and with the father.</p><p>God is not able to be seen by the human eye due to his majesty, because he is so great, so&nbsp;gleaming, even so aflame. We read: “His tabernacle is in the compass of heaven and earth;”&nbsp;because he is not able to be seen by man due to his greatness and splendor, he describes himself,&nbsp;whom he always has with him, who made a refuge for himself from flesh, and for that reason&nbsp;scripture says: “he made the darkness his covert,” and for that reason in the gospel the word of&nbsp;God says, as John says, “Because he was in the beginning, the word was made flesh,” and&nbsp;because he was from Mary, he thus added it to himself, so that it might be one. And through the&nbsp;scriptures he says: “out of Sion the loveliness of his beauty.” That is, man will cross over into&nbsp;God. In the gospels he himself says: “I have come from the father and come into the world.” In&nbsp;the forty-seventh psalm it says,”distribute His houses” -it says “His,” not “their,” because He is&nbsp;known to be one, but not manifestly alone – “that you might recount it in another generation.”</p><p>For on the day of the resurrection he who will not believe in the trinity in unity will be able&nbsp;neither to describe nor to prepare, and for Him all the soldiery of the angels exclaims each day:&nbsp;“Holy, holy holy the lord God of hosts” – it says not “three holies,” but “holy” three times, lord&nbsp;God of hosts: the holy father, the holy son, and the holy spirit -one holy, just like one lord.&nbsp;Thence also John the evangelist says: “The savior is he who is, who was and who will be.” Due&nbsp;to their names they might be perceived as ranks, but when you hear “the father,” though he&nbsp;appears to be greater in name (and for that reason he says, “the father is greater than me”) he is&nbsp;greater only in name: in divine nature, he is known most evidently through Christ and through&nbsp;his apostles to be one, because, when asked by a disciple, “Lord, show us the father,” he himself&nbsp;said, “You see me and you ask about the father?” You see, because he is called upon in trinity,&nbsp;he is also found to be in one in divine nature: when you hear “the father,” you do not believe that&nbsp;he is without the son; when you hear “the son,” you do not doubt that he is with the father; nor&nbsp;may you doubt that he is three in person, for he is known to be one in deity; and for that reason&nbsp;he said to his disciples, “Go and baptize in the name of the father and the son and the holy spirit – “in the name,” he said, not “in the names,” because he spoke in one deity, not three. However,&nbsp;the holy spirit is not separated, because the grace of God is known to come from it: the gift of&nbsp;God is known to be from it, and all good things live from it, just as the apostle said, “Because&nbsp;everything is from him and through him and in him.” And hence the prophet says: “You alone&nbsp;are most high,” but the savior&nbsp; “alone is most high in all the earth.” Joshua the son of Nun saw&nbsp;this and for that reason said: “Are you one of us or one of the adversaries?” Responding,&nbsp;however, He said: “I am who am, and there is none other before me.” Abraham, who is said and&nbsp;proven to be a friend of God, saw three and believed one, when he honored the three; he recalled&nbsp;the trinity, as I say; when he bid them enter the house as one, he delared them to be one power.&nbsp;&nbsp;For again and again He said to Moses: “I am who am, and there is none other before me.”</p><p>&nbsp;Must we point out each little thing? We come to the twelve disciples, whom He had and&nbsp;has, because today the Goths themselves pay veneration to them and their relics, but they do so&nbsp;secretly. But they have nothing there, because they take their faith for nothing. How is it that&nbsp;they do not enter their basilicas, where today their bodies are venerated? Why is it that they do&nbsp;not dare to do anything there, unless they ensnare souls secretly, like dogs at the door step, when&nbsp;King Alboin sends his men there and conducts them to the thresholds of the lords Peter, Paul,&nbsp;John or of the relics of the saints? If they dare to say masses there, they deliberate; but they do&nbsp;not dare, because they do not appear as disciples of the lord Peter and are proven to be enemies&nbsp;of Christ, because those unhappy ones are found to destroy that which he redeemed through the&nbsp;cross. From this such a king and such an age knows their poison.</p><p>If he orders something for the lord Martin for his festival, which comes on November 11,&nbsp;may he send them, and there, if they dare, they might see something, where today we see the&nbsp;blind receiving sight, where we see the deaf receive hearing and the mute receive reason. For&nbsp;what might I say about the lepers or so many of the others, who are oppressed by such numerous&nbsp;and great debilities, healed there each year -but each year more and more of them? And they&nbsp;probably say: “the blind are just pretending.” Because they appear to be blind from birth, what do&nbsp;they say, when we see newly illuminated people, and we see them return to their homes healthy&nbsp;with God’s mercy? For what may I say up to this point concerning the lord bishops Germanus,&nbsp;Hilary or Lupus, where such miracles appear today (so many that I cannot say with words),&nbsp;where <i>tribulantes</i> -that is, people possessed by demons- are tortured and suspended in the air,&nbsp;and they reveal themselves to be lords indeed? Now do they do the same in their churches? They&nbsp;do not, because they do not believe that God and the holy lords live there -a demon does not&nbsp;exorcise a demon. For where the saints live a demon is not allowed to wander. And for that&nbsp;reason may it be shown as a place where God is. What have you seen from the lord bishops&nbsp;Remegius and Medard, whom you, I believe, see? We are not able to express such things, what&nbsp;wondrous things we see God do through them.</p><p>You have heard how your grandmother, the mistress Chrodechild of good memory, came&nbsp;to Francia, how she led King Clovis to Catholicism; and, since he was a most astute man, he did&nbsp;not wish to assent until he knew the truth. When he saw that these things, which I said above,&nbsp;were proven, he humbly came to the threshold of the lord Martin and without delay consented to&nbsp;be baptized, and you have heard how great a king he, being baptized, became, among the heretics&nbsp;Alaric and Gundobad. What kind of gifts he himself and his son held in this world, you are not&nbsp;ignorant.</p><p>Such an honored man as King Alboin is said to be, such fame that the world thus&nbsp;displays, why does he not convert, or why does he appear late to seeking the way of salvation?&nbsp;Good Lord, who is the glory of the saints and the salvation of all, send yourself to him. And&nbsp;when you, mistress Chlodosind, say a word, give comfort, so that all of us might rejoice at such a&nbsp;star and gem, just as we are able to please God. I very greatly welcome such a thing; I ask that&nbsp;you not be quiet: cry out and sing incessantly. You have heard it said, “An unbelieving man will&nbsp;be saved through a faithful woman.” For you know: the first deliverance, the first releasing, is for&nbsp;him who makes a sinner turn from his error. Keep watch, keep watch, because you have a&nbsp;gracious God; I ask that as you proceed you make even the Lombardic people strong over their enemies and that you make us rejoice for your and your husband's health/salvation.&nbsp; Thus ends the letter.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Cum legatos vestros per Francorum reges, germanos tuos, ire conspicimus, de prosperitate vestra&nbsp;solliciti sumus; sed illa inde audimus, quod semper sonare etiam et sonare confitemur, quam&nbsp;magna, quam alta, quam laudabilis, quam utilis, quam humana vel munifica, quomodo de&nbsp;pauperes sollicita, quomodo de religione astuta, quomodo in cuncto populo prae conversatione&nbsp;splendida: ille hoc concedat, qui tibi spiritum sapientiae et intellectus iam dedit.</p><p>Gaudemus ex hoc, gaudere nos Christus faciat de Alboeno rege, quem habes, et de&nbsp;felicitate sua triumphare. Stupentes sumus, cum gentes illum trement, cum reges venerationem&nbsp;inpendent, cum potestates sine cessatione laudat, cum etiam ipse imperius ipsum praeponit, quod&nbsp;animae remedium non festinus requirit. Scriptum legimus: ‘Quaerite primum regnum Dei et&nbsp;omnia bona adponentur.’ Qui sic, quemadmodum ille, fulget fama, miror, quod de regno Dei et&nbsp;animae suae salute nihil investigare studet, sed illos recipit, illis quiescit, qui potius animam in&nbsp;gehenna perdunt, quam ad viam salutis adducant. Duos deos esse praedicant, alium in deitate&nbsp;patrem, alterum in deitate, sed pro&nbsp; creatura filium, cum scriptura dicat: Ego cum salvator, ‘et non&nbsp;est alius praeter me.’</p><p>Te, domna, Hlodosoinda, per tremendum diem iudicii coniuro, ut hanc epistulam et bene&nbsp;legas et bene illi, sed frequenter exponere studeas et ut ipsi interroges: Qui est salvator? Patrem&nbsp;dicunt esse salvatorem, an filium (quoniam duos esse, cum unus est, et alius non est,&nbsp;denuntiant)? Si dicent filium: Ergo pater salvator non est. Et si dixerint patrem: Ergo filius non&nbsp;est salvator, quia salvare, quoniam salvator non est, nullum potest. Si dixerint: duo sunt&nbsp;salvatores, istud scriptum numquam invenient, nisi: Ego et pater unum sumus, hoc est pater in&nbsp;filio et cum filio et filius in patre et cum patre.</p><p><span style="background-color: transparent;">Deus prae magnitudine videri ab oculo humano non potest, quia tantum grandis, tantum&nbsp;</span>fulgens, tantum etiam igneus. Legimus: In circuitu caeli et terrae tabernaculum eius; quod etiam&nbsp;prae ista magnitudine et splendore ab homine videri non potest, expraessit de se, quem semper&nbsp;habuit apud se, qui latibulum sibi de carne fecit, et ideo scriptura dicit: ‘Posuit tenebras litubulum&nbsp;suum,’; et ideo in evangelio ait verbum Dei, quem Iohannis dicit: ‘Quod in principio erat, verbum&nbsp;caro factum,’ et quod de Maria erat, sic illum ad se adiunxit, ut esset unum. Et per scriptura dixit:&nbsp;‘Ex Sion species decoris eius,’ hoc est: homo in deo transibit. In evangeliis ipse dixit: ‘Ego ex&nbsp;patre exivi et veni in hunc mundum.’ In quadragesimo septimo psalmo dixit: &nbsp;‘Distribuite gradus&nbsp;eius’ - eius dixit, non eorum, quoniam unus esse, sed nec solus apertissime scitur – ‘ut enarretis in&nbsp;progenie altera.’ Nam in die resurrectionis nec narrare nec parere poterit, qui trinitatem in unitate&nbsp;non crediderit, et pro eo omnis militia angelorum per singulos dies clamat: ‘Sanctus, sanctus,&nbsp;sanctus dominus Deus Sabaoth’ - non tres sancti, sed ter sanctum dixit dominum Deum Sabaoth:&nbsp;&nbsp;sanctus pater, sanctus filius, sanctus spiritus; unus sanctus, sicut unus dominus. Unde et Iohannes&nbsp;evangelista dixit: ‘Ipse est, qui est et qui erat et qui venturus est, salvator.’ Si pernominavero,&nbsp;gradi esse videntur: cum patrem audis, nomine autem maior esse videtur, et ideo dixit: ‘Pater&nbsp;maior me est;’ sed nomine tantum: in deitate autem evidentissime per Christum et per apostolos&nbsp;eius unus esse agnoscitur; quia ipse, cum a discipulo interrogatur: ‘Domine ostende nobis&nbsp;patrem,’ et ille: ‘Me vides et de patre interrogas’: Vides, quia in trinitate invocatur et in una, in&nbsp;deitate esse invenitur: cum patrem audis, sine filio esse non credas; cum audis filium, cum patre&nbsp;esse non dubites; nec dubites tres in personis, nam unus in deitate esse agnoscitur; et ideo ad&nbsp;discipulos suos dixit: ‘Ite, baptizate in nomine patris et filii et spiritus sancti’ - in nomine dixit,&nbsp;non in nomina, quia in una deitate dixit, non tres. Spiritus autem sanctus separari non potest,&nbsp;quoniam inde esse scitur gratia Dei: de donum Dei esse cognoscitur, ab ipso spirant bona omnia,&nbsp;sicut apostolus dixit: ‘Quoniam ex ipso et per ipsum et in ipso sunt omnia.’ Et hinc propheta dixit:&nbsp;&nbsp;‘Tu solus altissimus,’ sed ‘solus altissimus in omni terra’ salvator. Iesu Nave ipsum conspicit et&nbsp;ideo dixit: ‘Noster es an adversariorum?’ Ille autem respondens ait: ‘Ego sum, qui sum, et alius&nbsp;praeter me non est.’ Abraham, qui dicitur amicus Dei et probatur, tres vidit et unum credidit, cum&nbsp;tres adorat; trinitatem, sicut dixi, commemorat; cum uno in domo intrare deprecatur, unam&nbsp;potestatem esse denuntiat. Nam Moysi quotiens adque quotiens dixit: ‘Ego sum, qui sum, et alius&nbsp;praeter me non est.’</p><p>Quid nos ire per singula? Ad duodecim discipulos, quos habuit et habet, veniamus, quia&nbsp;ipsi Gothi hodie ipsis&nbsp; venerationem inpendent et reliquiis eorum, sed furtive tollent, sed nihil ibi&nbsp;habent, quia fidem eorum ad nulla re praesumunt. Quid est, quod in basilicas eorum, ubi corpora&nbsp;ipsorum hodie venerantur, non ingrediuntur? Quid est, quod nihil ibidem praesumere audent, nisi&nbsp;furtive, ut canes a foris, animas decipent, cum illos suos fideles rex Alboenus ibidem mittat et ad&nbsp;domni Petri, Pauli, Iohannis vel reliquorum sanctorum limina perducat? Ibidem missas facere, si&nbsp;audent, deliberent; sed non audent, quia domni Petri discipuli non apparent et contrarii Christi&nbsp;esse probantur: quia, quod per crucem ipse redemit, distruere infelices inveniuntur. Qua causa&nbsp;venena eorum talis rex et talis aetas percipit.</p><p>Hic si iubet ad domnum Martinum per festivitate sua, quod undecima dies facit&nbsp;November, ipsos mittat, et ibi, si audent, aliquid praesumant, ubi caecos hodie inluminare&nbsp;conspicimus, ubi surdis auditum et mutis sanitatem recipere. Nam quid dicam de leprosos aut de&nbsp;alios quam plures, qui quanta et quantacumque debilitate percussi sunt, ibidem per singulos&nbsp;annos -sed per singulos annos alii et alii -sanantur? Et fortasse dicunt: Confingunt vel caecos.&nbsp;&nbsp;Quia caeci a nativitate esse videntur, quid dicunt, cum inde inluminatos conspicimus et ad&nbsp;propria, Deo miserante, sanos reverti videmus? Nam quid dicam adhuc de domni Germani, Hilari&nbsp;vel Lupi episcopis, ubi tanta mirabilia hodie apparent, quantum nec dicere verbis valeo; ubi&nbsp;tribulantes, id est demonia habentes, in aera suspensi torquuntur et dominos, quos dixi, esse&nbsp;confitentur? Numquid in ecclesias eorum sic faciunt? Non faciunt, quia Deum et dominos&nbsp;sanctos ibi habitare non sentiunt: daemon daemonem non exorcizat; nam ubi sancti habitant,&nbsp;daemon vagari non dimittitur. Ideo fit, ut locus, ubi Deus est, ostendatur. Quid de domno&nbsp;Remegio et domno Medardo episcopis, quos tu, credo, videres vidisti? Non possumus tanta&nbsp;exponere, quanta mirabilia per illos deum videmus facere.</p><p>Audisti, ava tua, domna bone memoriae Hrodehildis, qualiter in francia venerit, quomodo&nbsp;domnum Hlodoveum ad legem catholicam adduxerit; et, cum esset homo astutissimus, noluit&nbsp;adquiescere, antequam vera agnosceret. Cum ista, quae supra dixi, probata cognovit, humilis ad&nbsp;domni Martini limina cecidit et baptizare se sine mora promisit, qui baptizatus quanta in&nbsp;hereticos Alaricum vel Gundobadum regum fecerit, audisti; qualia dona ipse vel filii sui in&nbsp;saeculo possiderunt, non ignoratis.</p><p>Talis ornatus, talis vir, qualis Alboenus rex esse dicitur, talis fama, quem mundus sic&nbsp;preponit, quare non convertitur, aut quare tardus at requirendum viam salutis apparet? Deus&nbsp;bone, qui es sanctorum gloria et omnium salus, tu te in illum mitte. Et tu, domna Hlodosuinda,&nbsp;cum verbum facis, solacium tribue, ut omnes de tale stella, de tale gemma sic gaudeamus,&nbsp;qualiter Deo placere possimus. Saluto tantum, quantum valeo; deprecor, ut otiosa non sis:&nbsp;&nbsp;incessanter clama, incessanter canta. Audisti dictum: ‘Salvabitur vir infidelis per mulierem&nbsp;fidelem.’ Nam sicas: prima salus, prima remissio est, qui converti fecerit peccatorem ab errore&nbsp;suo. Vigila, vigila, quia Deum propitium habes; rogo, ut sic agas, ut et gentem Langobardorum&nbsp;fortem super inimicos facias et nos de salute tua vel viri tui gaudere concedas. Explicit.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The Lombards, and probably Alboin himself, were still largely pagan when Bishop Nicetius of&nbsp;Trier sent this letter to Chlodosind, a Nicene Christian. In it, Nicetius denounces the missionary&nbsp;activities of Arian Christians in Alboin’s court, and he provides Chlodosind with scriptural proofs to&nbsp;draw her husband to Nicene Christianity.&nbsp; Nothing&nbsp;<span style="background-color: transparent;">precise is known about the letter’s context; its date can be narrowed only to the roughly ten-</span>year marriage of Alboin and Chlodosind. As Nicetius himself states in the opening, it was sent along&nbsp;with a Lombard embassy returning from the Frankish kingdoms.&nbsp; Kent Navalesi provided the translation and the information about the letter.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH, <em>Epistolae Merovingici et Karolini Aevi</em>, 1, Epistolae Austrasicae 3, pp. 119-122.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>559-70