---
letter_id: "26108"
title: "A poem from Hildebert"
ititle: "a poem from hildebert"
ltr_date: "1099-1100"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2018-11-09"
modified: "2018-11-19"
url: "/letter/26108.html"
senders:
  - id: 21399
    name: Hildebert of Lavardin
    iname: hildebert of lavardin
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 26106
    name: Muriel of Wilton
    iname: muriel of wilton
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p><span style="background-color: transparent;">Former times boasted of ten sibyls,<br></span>and it was a great glory to your sex.<br>present times rejoice in the wit of one,<br>and do not entirely lack a virgin poet.<br>Now also there are certain exchanges between gods and man,<br>which I think, and I am not wrong, speak from the mouth of a virgin.<br>They have set a shrine of God to be worshiped&nbsp; in your mind,<br>and made the sacred poet its mouth.<br>Whatever flows from your mouth transcends&nbsp;<br>the vigils of the ancients, inferior only to the gods.<br>Whatever you breath out is immortal, and<br>the world adores your work as divine.<br>You put down by your wit celebrated poets and bards<br>and both sexes are stunned by your eloquence.<br>Looking through the songs you sent me ten times over<br>I am amazed and I think they come from visits [divine inspiration].<br>It is not human to be capable of such sacred labors,<br>not you, but through you I believe the deities speak.<br>The weight of the words, the heavy sense, the beautiful order,<br>have the countenance of divine condition.<br>When I wonder at how much majesty supports them,<br>I am less mindful of the sad burden of exile.<br>Perhaps you do not know, but I, though an honorable guardian,<br>though part of a sacred order, I am [made] an exile.<br>You can, virgin, &nbsp;alleviate the cares of the exile<br>and the weights of hard labors with your song.<br>I beg you, alleviate them, do not abandon the one<br>Fortune has abandoned, you the very companion of Fortune.<br>Do not deny me words; I can demand nothing more lightly.<br>I hope for nothing from you, if you deny me words.<br>Unless perhaps you refuse service from exiles,<br>I, an exile, would strive in your service wherever.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p><span style="background-color: transparent;">Tempora prisca decem se iactavere sibillis,<br></span>et vestri sexus gloria multa fuit.<br>unius ingenio presentia secula gaudent,<br>et non ex toto virgine vate carent.<br>nunc quoque sunt homini quedam commercia divum,&nbsp; &nbsp;5<br>quos puto, nec fallor, virginis ore loqui.<br>mente tua posuere dei penetrale verendum,<br>osque sacrum vatem constituere suum.<br>ore tuo quecumque fluunt vigilata priorum<br>transcendunt, solis inferiora deis.<span class="Apple-tab-span">&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;1</span>o<br>quicquid enim spiras est immortale, tuumque<br>tanquam divinum mundus adorat opus.<br>deprimis ingenio vates celebresque poetas,<br>et stupet eloquio sexus uterque tuo.<br>carmina missa mihi decies spectata revolvens<span class="Apple-tab-span">&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;</span>15<br>miror, et ex aditis illa venire reor.<br>non est humanum tam sacros posse labores,<br>nec te, sed per te numina credo loqui.<br>pondera verborum, sensus gravis, ordo venustus<br>vultum divine condicionis habent.<span class="Apple-tab-span">&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;</span>20<br>cum miror quanta se maiestate tuentur,<br>parcius exilii triste recordor onus.<br>forsitan ignoras, sed ego dum tutor honestum,<br>dum sacri partes ordinis, exul agor.<br>exilii curas et pondera dura laborum&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 25<br>alleviare tuo carmine, virgo, potes.<br>allevies oro, nec quem Fortuna reliquit<br>linquere, Fortune tu comes ipsa, velis.<br>ne mihi verba neges; levius nil poscere possum.<br>nil a te spero, si mihi verba neges.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;30<br>exulis obsequium nisi cuius forte recuses,<br>exul in obsequium nitar ubique tuum.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Hildebert wrote this poem to Muriel while he was in exile in England.&nbsp; Like Baudri, he praises her poetic gifts lavishly and, playing on her sympathy for his exile, asks for poetry in return.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><span><span><em>Hildeberti Cenomannensis Episcopi, Carmina Minora,</em> ed. A. Brian Scott (Leipzig: &nbsp;Teubner, 1969), 17-18, #26.</span></span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1099-1100