---
letter_id: "26110"
title: "A poem from Serlo"
ititle: "a poem from serlo"
ltr_date: "before 1113"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2018-11-10"
modified: "2018-11-19"
url: "/letter/26110.html"
senders:
  - id: 26109
    name: Serlo of Bayeux
    iname: serlo of bayeux
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 26106
    name: Muriel of Wilton
    iname: muriel of wilton
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Since you ask for our song, which you know is of no use,<br>what is the fruit? &nbsp;what the honor? &nbsp;fearful, I attempt to write to you.<br>Let me not disrupt your city fertile with verses,<br>that you would have me turn my scorn-worthy care,<br>when the songs of your poet are far better.<br>He will ridicule me, if I am not mistaken, when he sees,<br>your Maro, what the the pedestrian speech offers.<br>But I note what writings are uttered with such a promise,<br>that you might rightly wish to supply the ear with these words.<br>Though the rustic song might perhaps be useful to you,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 10<br>do not take care to weigh the empty weight of the base pen,<br>do not look at the form of the meter, but the norm of the content.<br>O excellent sister, your fire impells many,<br>to join you in the contract of the chosen seed bed,<br>but seeing them frail and therefore scorning their contracts,<br>you enter the contract of the spouse for whom there is no end.<br>Having got rid of transitory things you are joined<br>to the golden bed of the highest leader with happy fate.<br>I praise your counsel, prudent sister, and I applaud you,<br>that you acquire such a spouse in place of a mortal [one].&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 20<br>Who will never perish, whom no term stops,<br>and instead of a swiftly perishing and corruptible husband,<br>whose beauty flourishes only a short while, you take the one<br>who remains and has remained, is not deterred, does not cross over,<br>who gives you heavenly kingdoms for a base couch,<br>laughter for tears, Paradise for laments.<br>To the union you have there can be no fall,<br>if you wish to carry out what a faithful spouse owes.<br>Therefor for the splendor of that marriage-bed to be bestowed,<br>you cannot corrupt the heavenly contract, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 30<br>nor think of deceit, but be known to that spouse alone.<br>Since he is so worthy of faith, keep the pledge to him,<br>do not believe the enemy whose temptations you know,<br>who never ceases to arouse you to vain things.<br>The greater the virtue, the more the rough plunderer burns<br>to set snares &nbsp;for virtue and employ frauds.<br>The more one who, scornful leaves the depths behind, rages against him<br>and clings to the heights, if constancy fails,<br>pushed by the enemy, he falls as he moves through slippery places.<br>Harming the prey, he whose weapons are many.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 40<br>. . .<br>O you enemy . . .<br>Let a rigid post not stop you . . .<br>Do not divert your course, but always look back,<br>and resolved seek God that he give you the trophy for defeating the enemy.<br>Do not follow evil, longing for transitory beauties.<br>When you feel the motion of your mind advancing boldly,<br>let this which I have written for you give you force [to move] onward.<br>The mind wanders and dulls, not knowing that it should<br>value pure flesh for love of the highest King.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 50<br>Therefor you should bear equal masses of whatever tedium,<br>O if you had married, how much heavier it would have been.<br>Virgin, do you think married women are blessed?<br>Knowing nothing, she might wish to take a husband.<br>Now about matrons, what their condition is,<br>hear, I beg, a little, since you do not know their life,<br>so that you may scarcely ever after say they are happy.<br>A woman submits to iron laws at the time she marries;<br>she does not escape punishment since an alien law oppresses her;<br>she does not please her husband unless she keeps a wondrous order.60<br>Having contracted nuptials to a famous … husband;<br>when she offers her husband all that a woman owes,<br>nothing is altogether suitable &nbsp;to the will of the lord,<br>she will be worse tortured than any handmaid.<br>Is she beautiful? &nbsp;she swiftly becomes suspect to the husband,<br>from tenuous cause, having dared no crime,<br>yet she will bear the harsh words of the crime as if convicted,<br>as he rages not only by word, but with bitter beating.<br>The husband loosing slings in punishment of his spouse,<br>because she touches the boundary, or looks at him,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 70<br>whose beauty shines, after a long time [she] might avoid<br>the encounter of the raging husband, like some bear.<br>If she puts on clothes, if she takes up suitable coverings,<br>or looks at combs, the spouse when he sees such things<br>with the credulous mind of the wicked, reels with heavy suspicion.<br>He finds everything done by her harmful.<br>On a feast day, anxious, she hides with a sad face,<br>whom the imprisoning husband encloses; while the assembly applauds,<br>the whole house rejoices, she offers nothing nor does she dare.<br>What can she offer whom such a cruel law terrifies?&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 80<br>And she sighs and weeps and prays with frequent pain;<br>that either she might rest in the life she has entered,<br>. . . &nbsp;strong … if [she] touches the divinities<br>. . . death of sorrow,<br>. . . the tomb as the dower for the beautiful body;<br>or distress furrows the face with lines of wrinkles<br>and loses the flower and rosey beauty.<br>. . . that beauty perishes, and now the husband seeks new pledges;<br>not having dared openly, he stealthily attacks the beauty.<br>He undertakes hidden attack of the wretch with adultery; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 90<br>[against] her, who before was a flower, he warms in fury,<br>having loosened the bonds of the marriage bed, he imputes to the mouth of his spouse<br>what is now filthy that before was indeed admirable.<br>But as the frost deformed the lovely rose,<br>so a harsh hand, heavy with anger, and profane fury,<br>does the flesh, broken by beatings over a long time;<br>shame does not slow him, now he only burns harder.<br>He is not at ease, unless she languish, and miserably<br>[his] speech or look deeply disturbs her breast.<br>Marital piety is such in the spouse&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 100&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;<br>that he denies consolation, and sends her far from their dwelling,<br>or pierces her side with a sword, whom he avoids touching and hates.<br>He rejoices and rarely, the miser, bestows the bridal bed on her,<br>who while enflamed to extend the mass of his property,<br>is zealous with great passion to add money to money .<br>He burns for acquisition, with the raging fire of Cupid,<br>not indulging the stomach, not shining in the covering,<br>the woman he desires he does not clothe with that covering.<br>He does not offer her the thinnest food, being very stingy,<br>the man who so burns, if the woman is slow to render&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 110<br>what remains at the table, he flies wild with the sword,<br>and moves bitter wars for a vile morsel,<br>constraining the bride; is it not a huge disgrace,<br>that the kinswoman is so pressed for a little crumb?<br>If, at the happy displays and games which age draws on,<br>she applauds the players, right away she hears the voice of the spouse:<br>“Silly, ignorant wife, why do you play, scorning serious things?<br>“This game shows where your concern is;<br>“This game shows where your understanding tends.<br>“Let your care be on the hearth; let jesting levity be absent.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 120<br>“Keep what has accumulated, accumulate what is diffused.”<br>He urges that abundance not sustain the handmaid<br>or that she live with happy face and quiet heart.<br>&nbsp;. . . she deplores or . . . prays,<br>for any wife [lives] this or worse life.<br>It is scarcely a worthy thing that the light mind longs for these,<br>The pleasant coupling of the marriage bed to be had vehemently for shame,<br>what is sweet to the heart is yet harmful to the heart,<br>because the happier it is, the less pure the coupling is.<br>It is contrary to virtue to use such things,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 130<br>or does the honorable mind desire the stink of loose mud?<br>In that intercourse brief indulgence charms the brides,<br>then the pain of childbirth so undoes the broken joints,<br>that she wants to die rather than be subject to such pain,<br>the violence of fate repays this indulgence.<br>The mother resists death when the pledge is born;<br>living after birth, she carries a heavy weight, and the road is twisted,<br>she prepares sad care for herself and an unavoidable heap [of care],<br>the woman in labor gives birth to a child and two-fold fear.<br>The grave care of nourishing children presses her,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 140<br>and she is quite plagued in the breast by suckling new-borns;<br>with difficulty she loosens the skin of her breasts, if you were to touch them<br>filthy, obscene, and filled with a river of milk.<br>She washes clothes, the labor increasing over the years,<br>how she cleans the children, I would recite, but shame presses.<br>Perhaps you might say beggars live by this compact;<br>yet not those who are in villages, towns.<br>Abundance as it enriches perhaps enriches such things,<br>but to some extent contaminates her life worse.<br>She lacks all praise, unless she is subject to Venus;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 150<br>and unless the rich woman admits her fellow citizens.<br>If she lives chastely, she deprives herself of a famous name;<br>she is said to be ignorant and rough with crude habits,<br>worthy of an impoverished man, she would feel the need of harsh crime.<br>This is the common judgment of the loathsome crowd,<br>that she knows nothing unless she becomes a filthy adulterer.<br>Whom rage burns, who is horrified by nothing that she loves,<br>and is swiftly trapped, she becomes worthy of Jove as a husband.<br>The purple she wears, Venus wears to burn more;<br>Who married a bull shone with jewels and gold.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 160<br>What is your bride, Nero? &nbsp;But why do I seek earlier evils?<br>More are tainted with this crime in [our] savage age;<br>They are more exalted who flourish at the height of fate.<br>Therefore with faith broken, there is crime in married wealth,<br>In poverty, labor and pain and ruin.<br>. . . if sad fate should sieze the sweet infant,<br>. . . so it perishes by a mournful immoderate fate<br>. . . weeping &nbsp;that he is taken away against her will whom she nourished at her breast,<br>if grave labor or pain clings to this, and she mourns<br>that the pledge is not safe, that comes from her belly.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 170&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;<br>Matrons live under such condition[s].<br>But there is nothing that I do, which the bitter woman (<i>virago</i>) would tolerate,<br>that I believe cannot be carried by word,<br>what I think is to be fled by one seeking to live safely.<br>Lacking that burden, sing so much with happy melody,<br>moreover that the fate of liberty is given to you.<br>And rejoicing at the coming hope, and free of harsh<br>weight and such that would be grave to think about.<br>Tired by the labor of the crowd, assume the consolation of labor,<br>brides are subject to greater rigor,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 180<br>and bear more evil, subject to such a prison,<br>whose enclosure is a bitter kind of fate.<br>Compared with so many evils, the nun who wishes life,<br>if she thinks rightly, would hold the claustral yoke light.<br>Why should she not be well otherwise, the [monastic] law would not remove from her<br>that the sweetness of sleep refreshes at certain hours,<br>that repels hunger with food, cold with the [monastic] habit.<br>If she gains no wealth, if she thinks about neither,<br>since she pours out no sweat, it flows back both ways,<br>God so enriches her, if she wishes to avoid what is harmful,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 190<br>all parts of the whole vow respond.<br>Having pursued the course of each to the goals,<br>This one endures, that one perishes, that one flees what the other seeks.<br>This one will never turn back, never be subject to infernal caves,<br>flames, bad smells, shadows, torments, pains;<br>what is heavy, what brings cruelty, and will through all time.<br>That one having received many adornments, beyond all who were born,<br>with more flourishing prize she will remain with nourishing people.<br>This one you might always turn, you would not loose the bonds of the rule,<br>to tolerate which you would not wish for one hour, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 200<br>for the fortune of Priam; labor to avoid the flames&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;<br>to suffer which without end is a miserable kind of fate,<br>and learning to proceed to the kingdom not by slow foot,<br>you would seek certain rewards, which age does not diminish.<br>When you discern eternal things well, you scorn the temporary;<br>if you think of heavenly things, you hold nothing failing;<br>what always endures, if one takes care to bring it together,<br>that …you …<br>as this is less, may the manner be absent that …<br>to the brief moment compare now one hundred centuries,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 210<br>how much a moment is less than a hundred centuries.<br>That may be known if the thing is counted carefully.<br>But embrace this lest one with equal reasons,<br>not pondering so much that you can say how much,<br>that in this brief time of life the extent of time may be longer.<br><span style="background-color: transparent;">Choose what lasts, let nothing that perishes consume you,<br></span>let your hope not be in those ends which tend to dissolve.<br>Let no care for your relatives touch you;<br>not sister or brother, not even father or mother.<br>No one loves truly, be moved by the love of no one.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 220<br>The mother loving the newborn weeps for the lamentable fate of the child;<br>nor does it yet touch him whom sorrow and anxiety strike.<br>What sorrow! &nbsp;gold things are in horror most like a flower;<br>charming earlier with sweet laughter . . . [later] horrid to the sight.<br>What before was a rose is now a burdensome mass;<br>vile, seeking the depths, heavy to all, horrid, stinking.<br>The iron law of death so rules all who are born,<br>that what shines in life, in death all avoid,<br>nor do they think they should be touched, but reject them as cursed.<br>If, seeking, you persist, accustomed to be a survivor of the parent,&nbsp;&nbsp; 230<br>you avoid suffering a long time after the death of the child,<br>and without great mourning having buried the father of the child.<br>They fight among themselves so that they may bring wealth under their yoke,<br>and such fighting so increases with discord,<br>that they prostrate themselves, and blind with cupidity they spurn [others].<br>With little fraternal mercy, crimes of murder,<br>oh greatest outrage, to put wealth before a brother!<br>So brother to brother, so the daughter serves her mother,<br>to whom the fates give full purses with generous sense,<br>so many faithful slaves you see run after it.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 240<br>If fortune moves storms emptying cells,<br>and withdraws the reward, not one of . . . remains.<br>From this one may know that property is so loved,<br>no one in want is loved, what nation of the world, what people,<br>does not have these customs or much worse.<br>Thus every man loves; do you know why I bring out such things?<br>Let your mind not go back to the filth of the world.<br>With such a pact drawn from the whirlwind of the world,<br>I write the truth, but only the tiniest part of things.<br>. . .&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;250<br>. . . I unfold, but you well know the rest.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;<br>. . . turn with much care to these words.<br>Let the work not be what I do, not the image of the part said.<br>Meanwhile meditate with deep heart more about the world.<br>Grant that these worldly things are very vain,<br>nor could true vanities move the pure heart.<br>Then it will be apparent, your mind will lack filth,<br>when you neglect the people of the fatherland and relatives,<br>take care if you look back at the small but sweet fields,<br>to reject the natal lands where you wander again.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 260<br>If you look well at the thing, you do not turn to this road from now on.<br>Stay here in this place, cultivate those who tend the hours,<br>to use these ends is not to your health, virgin.<br>You would give opportunities to the enemy if you turned back.<br>You would hear more often what would take your strength,<br>and a vain look would corrupt your breast.<br>The secret places of your mind would be shaken by Satanic winds,<br>if you wished to abandon the comforts of the cloister;<br>if you avoid the return, you enrich yourself with great strength,<br>and you feel yourself always needing the wealth of the ruler. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;270<br>For no one conquers except with the favor of the highest king.<br>Trusting in his care direct your weapons,<br>do not otherwise shatter the learned phalanxes in war,<br>the necks which you break, and you will touch the rewards of life.<br>We beg, pray for our weakness,<br>this will be good for us, nor will it, I think, hurt you.<br>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Dum nostrum poscis carmen, quod inutile noscis,<br>Quis fructus? &nbsp;quis honor? trepidus tibi scribere conor.<br>Ne vestram turbem faecundam [facundam] versibus urbem,<br>Indignaturam quod habes mea volvere curam,<br>Cum merliora satis sint vestri carmina vatis.<br>Me deridebit, ni fallor, quando videbit,<br>Ille Maro vester, quae profert sermo pedester.&nbsp;&nbsp;<br>Sed quae scripta noto tali sunt edita voto,<br>His ut jure velis aurem praebere loquelis.<br>Carmen agreste licet tibi forsitan utile dicet,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 10<br>Pondus inane styli ne cures pendere vili,<br>Nec metri formam, sed rerum perspice normam.<br>O soror insignis, multos tuus impulit ignis,<br>Germinis electi foedus tibi jungere lecti,<br>Quos fragiles cernens, et ob hoc sua foedera spernens,<br>Sponsi foedus inis quem nescit claudere finis.<br>Summi namque ducis rebus divulsa caducis,<br>Es connexa toro fatis felicibus oro.<br>Consilium laudo, prudens soror, et tibi plaudo,<br>Cum pro mortali potiaris conjuge tali.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 20<br>Qui nunquam marcet, quem nullus terminus arcet,<br>Et pereunte cito corruptibilique marito,<br>Cujus pauxillum floret decor, accipis illum<br>Qui manet ac mansit, nec deteritur neque transit,<br>Qui tibi pro vili dat coelica regna cubili,<br>Pro lacrimis risum pro lamentis Paradisum.<br>Conjugio quod habes nescit succedere labes,<br>Si complere velis, quod debet sponsa fidelis.<br>Illius ergo tori cujus conferre nitori<br>Nec potes astra poli, corrumpere foedera noli,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 30<br>Nil meditata doli, sed sponso cognita soli.<br>Cum sit tam dignus fidei, serva sibi pignus,<br>Nec credas hosti, cujus temptamina nosti,<br>Qui nunquam cessat quin vos ad vana lacessat.<br>Quo major virtus, raptor magis aestuat hirtus<br>Tendere virtuti laqueos, et fraudibus uti.<br>Plus in eum saevit qui linquens infima sprevit,<br>Et summis haesit, cui se constantia desit<br>Pulsus ab hoste cadit, dum per loca lubrica vadit.<br>Praedo nocens ille cujus sunt spicula mille.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 40<br>. . . . .<br>O inimico tu . . .<br>Ut rigidus postis ne te feret . . .<br>Neu flectas cursum, sed semper respice rursum,<br>Et pete certa Deum victo det ut hoste trophaeum.<br>Neu male te ducas, species inhiando caducas.<br>Cum temere sentis motum procedere mentis,<br>Hac ope quam scripsi tibi fac vim protinus ipsi.<br>Errat mens et hebet, non cognoscens quia debet<br>Carnea pura premi pro Regis amore supremi.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 50<br>Ergo feras aeque moles de taedia quaeque,<br>O si nupsisses, quanto graviora tulisses.<br>Virgo maritatas an censes esse beatas?<br>Nulla sciens ritum vellet duxisse maritum.<br>Nunc de matronis, cujus sint conditionis,<br>Audi quaeso parum, cum vitam noscitis harum,<br>Quod sint felices haud unquam postea dices.<br>Ferrea jura subit mulier quo tempore nubit;<br>Non vacat a poena quia lex premit hanc aliena;<br>Nec placet illa viro nisi serviat ordine miro.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 60<br>Ad celebrem . . . contracta nupta maritum;<br>Cumque viro praebet totum quam femina debet,<br>Ni res ex toto domini sit congrua voto,<br>Qualibet ancilla gravius torquebitur illa.<br>Sit speciosa? &nbsp;cito fiet suspecta marito,<br>Ex tenui causa, nil prorsus criminia ausa,<br>Tanquam convicta sceleris feret aspera dicta,<br>Nec solum verbo, sed verbere saevit acerbo.<br>Conjugis in poenas laxando maritus habenas,<br>Quod si paxillum tangit, vel respicit illum,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 70<br>Cujus forma nitet, longo post tempore vitet<br>Conjugis occursum saevi, quasi quaelibet ursum.<br>Si pannos aptet, si congrua tegmina captet,<br>Sive comas spectat, conjunx ubi talia spectat,<br>Suspicione gravi titubat mens credula pravi.<br>Res ab ea gestas omnes fert ipse molestas.<br>Ipsa die festo vultu latet anxia moesto,<br>Quam sponsus claudit concludens concio plaudit,<br>Tota domus gaudet, nil profert illa nec audet.<br>Quidnam proferret quam lex tam ferrea terret?&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 80<br>et gemit et plorat crebrisque doloribus orat;<br>Ut vel inita possit requiescere vita,<br>. . . te fortis . . . ssi numina tangit<br>. . . ti moeroris mors,<br>. . . pulcrum corpus pro dote sepulcrum;<br>Aut vultum rugis sulcat turbatio jugis,<br>Et certum florem perdit roseumque decorem.<br>. . . decor ille perit, mox vir nova pignora quaerit;<br>Non ausus coram furtim colit ipse decoram.<br>Suscipit occultum nebulonis adultera cultum;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 90<br>Quam praefert flori, nec quem fovet ipse furori,<br>Foedera laesa tori, sed conjugis imputat ori<br>Quod modo turpe quidem fuit admirabile pridem.<br>Sed quasi bruma rosam deformavit speciosam,<br>Carnem dura manus, gravis ira, furorque profanus,<br>Verberibus ruptam sic longo tempore nuptam,<br>Ni pudor hoc tardet, modo tandem durius ardet.<br>Nec jam fert aeque, nisi langueat haec, misereque<br>Sermo vel aspectus turbat graviter sibi pectus.<br>Estque maritalis pietas in conjuge talis,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 100<br>Ut fomenta neget, procul hanc et ab aede releget,<br>Aut latus ense fodit, quam tangere vitat et odit.<br>Gaudet et hoc raro quam confert lectus avaro,<br>Qui dum succensus massam distendere census,<br>Affectu summo nummum studet addere nummo.<br>Ardet pro quaestu, flagrante Cupidinis aestu,<br>Non satis indulgens ventri, non tegmine fulgens,<br>Femina quam gestit, non illam tegmine vestit.<br>Nec illi vescam praebet parcissimus escam<br>Vir qui sic ardet, si femina reddere tardet&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 110<br>Quod superest mensae, stricta ferus advolat ense,<br>Et pro buccella vili movet aspera bella,<br>Nuptam constringens, numquid sit dedecus ingens,<br>Pro tenui mica dum sic urgetur amica?<br>Ad species laetas et ludos qua trahit aetas<br>Si luditis plaudit, mox vocem conjugis audit:<br>“Uxor inepta, rudis, cur, spernens seria, ludis?<br>“Hoc patet in ludo quae sit tua sollicitudo;<br>“Hic jocus ostendit tua quo sententia tendit.<br>“Sit tibi cura laris; levitas absit jocularis.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 120<br>“Congestam serva, diffusam rem coacerva.”<br>Urget ut ancillam, locuples nec sustinet illam<br>Vel vultu laeto vel vivere corde quieto.<br>. . . deplorat vel . .. orat,<br>Quod hac aut vita graviori quaeque marita.<br>Res est digna parum quam mens levis expetit harum,<br>Copula blanda tori vehementer habenda pudori,<br>Quae dulcis cordi tamen est obnoxia cordi,<br>Quod plus jocundum minus hoc fert copula mundum.<br>Res est virtuti contraria talibus uti,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 130<br>Foetoremne luti mens optet honesta soluti?<br>In coitu nuptas mulcet brevis illa voluptas,<br>Inde dolor partus quassos ita dissipat artus,<br>Optet ut illa mori tanto subjecta dolori,<br>Huicque voluptati satagit violentia fati.<br>Obviat et morti genitrix modo pignoris orti;<br>Vivens post partum, grave fert onus, ac iter arctum,<br>Molem mansuram, tristemque parit sibi curam,<br>Ancipitemque metum pariendo puerpera foetum.<br>Cura fovendorum gravis urget eam puerorum,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 140<br>Vexaturque satis sugentibus ubera natis;<br>Vix laxat pelles mammarum, tangere velles<br>Turpes, obscoenas, et lactis flumine plenas.<br>Abluat ut pannos, labor ut sibi crescat in annos,<br>Ut pueros purget, recitarem, sed pudor urget.<br>Forsan mendicas hoc pacto vivere, dicas;<br>Tantum non illas quae tractant oppida, villas.<br>Copia quam ditat fortassis talia ditat,<br>Sed quoddam pejus vitam contaminat ejus.<br>Omni laude caret, Veneri nisi subdita paret;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 150<br>Et nisi concives admittat femina dives.<br>Si caste vivat, celebri se nomine privat;<br>Dicitur esse rudis, et moribus aspera crudis,<br>Paupere digna viro, careat quia crimine diro.<br>Haec est communis foedi sententia clunis,<br>Ut nihil illa sciat, nisi turpis adultera fiat.<br>Quam rabies torret, quae nil quod diligat horret,<br>Decipiturque cito, sic fit Jove digna marito.<br>Purpura quas vestit, Venus has magis urere gestit;<br>Quae nupsit tauro, gemmis radiabat et auro.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 160<br>Quid tua nupta, Nero ? Sed cur mala pristina quaero ?<br>Hoc plures aevo maculantur crimine saevo;<br>Hae magis elati quae florent culmine fati.<br>Ergo fide rupta scelus est in divite nupta,<br>In paupertina labor et dolor atque ruina.<br>. . . dulcem natum rapiat, si fiebile fatum,<br>. . . iti fato luctu perit immoderato<br>. . . flens tolli quem nutriit ubere nolli,<br>Si gravis huic haeret labor aut dolor, hoc quoque moeret,<br>Pignore non salvo, quod ab ejus prodiit alvo.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 170<br>Vivunt matronae tali sub conditione.<br>Sed nihil est quod ago, toleret quod acerba virago,<br>Ut credo ferri non posset voce referri,<br>Quae fugienda puto quaerenti vivere tuto.<br>Mole carens tanta laeto modulamine canta,<br>Desuper esse datum libertatis tibi fatum.<br>Et spe venturi gaudens et libera duri,<br>Ponderis ac tanti quod fit grave vel meditanti.<br>Fessa labore chori solatia sume labori,<br>Nuptas majori subjectas esse rigori,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 180<br>Et plus ferre mali subjectas carcere tali,<br>Cujus claustra pati species est aspera fati.<br>Tot conferre malis qui vitam vult monialis,<br>Si recte penset, claustrale jugum leve censet,<br>Quin bene possit ali, non aufert lex moniali,<br>Quod certis horis reficit dulcedo soporis,<br>Quaeque famem victu frigusque repiellit amictu.<br>Cum nil lucretur, cum de neutro meditetur,<br>Cumque nihil fundat sudoris, utroque redundat,<br>Sic Deus hanc ditat, si velle nocentia vitat,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 190<br>Illius ex toto respondent singula voto.<br>Ad metas usque secta cursus utriusque,<br>Haec manet, illa perit, fugit illa quod altera quaerit.<br>Haec subit infernas nunquam reditura cavernas,<br>Flammas, foetores, tenebras, tormenta, dolores;<br>Quod grave, quod saevum fert, et feret omne per aevum.<br>Illa recepta choro super omnia nata decoro,<br>Floridior palma cum gente morabitur alma.<br>Haec semper volvas, ne normae vincula solvas,<br>Quas pro fortuna Priami tolerare vel una&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 200<br>Non velles hora, flammas vitare labora,<br>Quas sine fine pati genus est miserabile fati,<br>Et pedis non segni discens procedere regni,<br>Praemia certa petas, cujus non decidit aetas.<br>Cum bene discernes aeterna, fluentia spernes;<br>Coelica si penses, nihil esse cadentia censes;<br>Quod semper durat, si quis componere curat,<br>Ut te de . . . . .<br>Sic est ista minor, modus absit ut . . . .<br>Ad breve momentum confer modo secula centum,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 210<br>Quanto momentum minus est quam secula centum.<br>Illud nosse datur cum caute res numeratur.<br>Sed cohibere ne quis istud rationibus aequis,<br>Nec volvens tantum quod possis dicere quantum,<br>Hac aetate brevi spatium sit longius aevi.<br>Elige quod durat, nil te quod praeterit urat;<br>Spes tua non sit in his quae tendit solvere finis.<br>Nil cognatorum te tangat cura tuorum;<br>Non soror, aut frater, sed nec genitor neque mater.<br>Nullus amat vere, nullius amore movere.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 220<br>Mater amans natum, flet nati flebile fatum;<br>Nec tamen hunc tangit quem tristis et anxia plangit.<br>Proh dolor! horrori sunt ora simillima flori;<br>Blanda prius risu dulci . . . horrida visu.<br>Quod fuit ante rosa, nunc moles est onerosa;<br>Vilis, et ima petens, gravis omnibus, horrida, foetens.<br>Ferrea lex mortis sic omnibus imperat ortis,<br>Ut quae viva nitent, ea cuncti mortua vitent,<br>Nec tangenda putent, sed ut execranda refutent.<br>Si quaerens perstes, genitoris solet esse superstes,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 230<br>Tempora longa pati vitas post funera nati,<br>Et nati multo sine luctu patre sepulto.<br>Inter se certant ut opes sua sub juga vertant,<br>Et sic certantum crescit discordia tantum,<br>Ut sese sternant, caecique cupidine spernant.<br>Parvae mercedis fraternae crimina caedis,<br>0 facinus summum, fratri praeponere nummum !<br>Sic frater fratri, sic servit filia matri,<br>Cui largo plenas sensu dant fata crumenas,<br>Tot fidos vernas post illum currere cernas.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 240<br>Si vacuans cellas moveat fortuna procellas,<br>Ac retrahat munus, remanet de . . . nec unus.<br>Ex hoc scire datur, quia tantum census amatur,<br>Nullus amatur egens, quae mundi natio, quae gens,<br>Non habet hos mores, aut multo deteriores.<br>Sic amat omnis homo; scis tu cur talia promo ?<br>Ad sordes mundi ne sit tibi mens redeundi.<br>Dum tali pacto de mundi turbine tracto,<br>Scribo quidem verum, sed pars millesima rerum.<br>. . . &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 250<br>. . . pando, sed tu bene cuncta notando.<br>. . . is plura dictis advertere cura.<br>Ne sit opus quod ago, non dictae partis imago.<br>Dum plus de mundo meditabere corde profundo.<br>Haec res mundanas magis esse fatebere vanas,<br>Nec poterunt vera cor purum vana movere.<br>Tunc apparebit, mens tua sorde carebit,<br>Cum patriae gentes neglexeris atque parentes,<br>Cura vel parva si dulcia respicis arva,<br>Natales terras ubi prorsus respuis erras. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 260<br>Si bene rem spectes non huc iter amodo flectes.<br>Hic factura moras, illas cole quas colit horas,<br>Finibus his uti non est tibi virgo saluti.<br>Opportuna dares hosti loca si remeares.<br>Saepius audires quam subtraheret tibi vires,<br>Vanus et aspectus labefactaret tibi pectus.<br>Tot Sathanse ventis titubarent abdita mentis,<br>Commoda claustricolis quae si dimittere nolis,<br>Si reditum vitas, largo tibi robore ditas,<br>Et quia te sentis ope semper egere regentis. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 270<br>Vincet enim nemo nisi rege favente supremo.<br>Ejus tutela fidens tua dirige tela,<br>Non aliter franges doctas ad bella phalanges,<br>Colla quibus frangas, et vitae premia tangas.<br>Quaesumus orate pro nostra debilitate,<br>Proderit hoc nobis, oberit nec ut aestimo vobis.<br>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Serlo writes to Muriel, apparently in answer to her request, urging her to stay in the cloister with disturbing descriptions of the life of a married woman, mistreated by her husband, suffering in childbirth.&nbsp; He makes little of his own poetic talents, expecting them to be ridiculed by "your Maro," "Maro vester," identified as Baudri of Bourgueil by Elisabeth Van Houts in a conference paper in <em>Tabularia</em>, 2016, "Serlo of Bayeux and England," paragraph 12.&nbsp; The language of the poem is dense, the meaning of some passages obscure.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>The Anglo-Latin Satirical Poets and Epigrammatists of the Twelfth Century</i>, ed. Thomas Wright (London:Longman, 1872), v.2, &nbsp;233-40 .</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>before 1113