---
letter_id: "26116"
title: "A poem to Baudri"
ititle: "a poem to baudri"
ltr_date: "before 1107"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2018-12-18"
modified: "2021-11-26"
url: "/letter/26116.html"
senders:
  - id: 26114
    name: Constance of Le Ronceray
    iname: constance of le ronceray
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26114.html
receivers:
  - id: 21270
    name: Baudri, abbot of Bourgueil and archbishop of Dol
    iname: baudri, abbot of bourgueil and archbishop of dol
    type: people
    url: /people/21270.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>I have read through your letter with studious hunting,<br>And I have touched your verses with my bare hand.<br>I &nbsp;have delighted in unrolling the volume two, three, four times,<br>Nor could I be satisfied by picking apart single (verses).<br>That book was welcome to me, the words most welcome, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 5<br>So I spent the day reading them often.<br>The night, hostile to my studies, envious of my reading,<br>Compelled me to cease from my study.<br>I put together the sheet in my lap and put it beneath my left breast<br>Which, as they say, is more closely joined to the heart.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;10<br>If I could send your volumes to my heart,<br>I would send each one to my heart, not to my lap.<br>At last I gave my weary limbs over to the night's sleep;<br>But troubled love does not recognize the night.<br>What did I not hope? What was I not permitted to hope?&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 15<br>Your book produced hope; night had given free time.<br>In sleep I was sleepless, because your page<br>In my lap had, of course, heated up my heart.<br>Oh, if only it might be granted for me to gaze on such a prophet,<br>Oh, if only a moment might be granted for conversation!&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 20<br>Oh, how great a prophet, how gifted this poet,<br>Oh, with what a divine mouth he sings whatever he pleases!<br>What elegance is in his sayings, oh what wisdom in his words,<br>Oh how distinguished by his pen is this man!<br>But I think the man even more distinguished by his deeds:&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 25<br>He both does and says everything wisely.<br>If long ago Rome had earned him (as) a foster-child for itself,<br>He would be stern Cato, or Tully.<br>His words would make him Cicero, his deeds would make him Cato.<br>He alone is worth many Aristotles.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;30<br>He seems to be, and he is, and he is said to be another Homer:<br>Oh with what appropriate measure he sings his verses!<br>He knows the Greek stories and their allegorical meanings,<br>And also what each and every myth signifies.<br>Just so you believe me: he put it to verse;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;35<br>His (interpretive) ability makes multiple meanings.<br>With blade unsheathed victorious David struck off<br>Goliath's head with his own sword.<br>Similarly, this poet-prophet approached the inner chambers of the Greeks<br>And plundered those pagan homes.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;40<br>He turned their own traps and swords against the enemy,<br>Conveying to us in verse that people's wealth.<br>He transported to us Pelasgian trifles and treasures,<br>Tearing the spoils out of their rich pantry.<br>He knows what Mars, Juno, and the rest of that crowd&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 45<br>Of gods means, he knows and has explained.<br>If a question arises concerning the utterances of the gods,<br>He explains the difficulties with nectar-sweet eloquence.<br>And what is there, I ask, which could elude his mind?<br>He encompasses everything with his clever genius.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;50<br>If talk should arise about the composition of his beauty,<br>My Muse is unequal to such a thing.<br>Just like a flower he stands alone among mortals,<br>He exceeds in body and face other handsome men.<br>Like the most conspicuous star among the heaven-dwellers,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;55<br>He is more pleasing than the dawn, and brighter than the sun.<br>Oh how much and how great is explained to me by his poetry,<br>I see him in his verses, for I cannot (do) otherwise.<br>Alas that I cannot often see the one I love!<br>Miserable me! I cannot behold what I desire.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;60<br>I am weakened by desire and by day-long prayers;<br>In vain I pour out vows and prayers to God.<br>A year has gone by in which I could not see the man I seek;<br>But (now) I read his verses often.<br>Oh, what verses, how sweet, how beautiful;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 65<br>He who is lost to me sent them to me yesterday.<br>My beloved's little sheet lies in this lap;<br>Look, it lies placed beneath my breasts!<br>Oh, if only my beloved were now here<br>Who would explain the meaning of his own poem.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 70<br>But two or three of his companions would stand around me<br>Even though he himself would suffice for my trust.<br>But lest there should be any complaint of suspicion,<br>Let my faithful sister be with me, at least.<br>Bright would be that day, nor would fortune have placed us&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 75<br>Alone in this place, but rather at the public square.<br>Look, wakeful I lie awake, because the book which he sent me<br>Yesterday has been read many times and kept me awake.<br>But what am I doing? What I ponder the whole night is nothing,<br>What I beg for with troubled heart is nothing.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 80<br>He will not come to me, nor will I who thirst for him see him<br>Whom the Poitevin land troubles greatly.<br>Perhaps for that reason, miserable me!, he sent his verses<br>To correct me and give me his words,<br>So that he might disguise himself, his letter deceive me,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 85<br>In order that his crafty letter might allay my fear.<br>Alas, what should I not fear? I will never rest secure;<br>Nor will my love nor my trust ever be safe.<br>When he gives me new instructions, I am more tormented;<br>I can never not be suspicious.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;90<br>When I do not know (where he is), I fear some wandering might snatch him away:<br>Every girl envies my hopes.<br>Indeed, no girl would be more fortunate than me<br>If I had safe love and safe pacts.<br>Although firm fidelity affirms my friend for me,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 95<br>I cannot believe that I am secure in his fidelity.<br>And I do not doubt that there is anything to be feared about this in his fidelity,<br>But I fear to lose what I violently love.<br>With fluctuating heart I have passed the hours of the night;<br>Thus I was able enough to tell myself many things.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;100<br>Look! now bright Aurora drives forth her chariot,<br>And the arbutus trees resound with the chattering of birds.<br>I shall turn to the wax, because wax knows no shame<br>And it can deliver words suitable to my Lord [or: lord].<br>Indeed, I will write many things which I do not want to say in person;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 105<br>Shame often curbs a girl's daring acts.<br>Oh, if only the things a lover's mind will compose might please!<br>If only the lyric of my poem might please him!<br>You yourself, my beloved, you order and, I say, instruct<br>me to apply my efforts to the laws of chastity.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 110<br>And I will: just as you order, so do I choose.<br>And thus have I arranged my own days until now.<br>I have been chaste, I am chaste now, I want to live chaste;<br>Oh, if only I could live as a bride of God.<br>Yet not for this do I myself detest your love;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 115<br>The bride of God should love God's servants.<br>You are a servant of the bridegroom, you are brother and co-heir;<br>You, too, you are worthy by my bridegroom's love.<br>The bride should respect the friends of her bridegroom.<br>Therefore I respect you, I love you vigilantly.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 120<br>May law and rule always watch over our love.<br>&nbsp;May a chaste life commend our games.<br>Let us therefore have a simplicity pure as a dove,<br>And do not prefer any (girl) more than me.<br>But if you favor, if your prefer any other (girl),&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;125<br>Know that this game is not in the Lord.<br>If you deceive, you are bad, if you tell the truth, wicked;<br>Either crime besieges and emprisons the game.<br>God condemns liars and those acting perversely;<br>You do one or the other, or both at the same time.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;130<br>But let God emend, let God correct these things in you;<br>This worry does not allow me to forget you.<br>I hate the name of another girl so much, that<br>I am colder than ice at the name of (any) girl.<br>But I will trust you, as you wish, and I will trust your wanting&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 135<br>and trust your writing; you, too, trust in me.<br>If Rome calls you, if Mayenne tempts you,<br>Quickly draw back your foot from each, if you are mine.<br>Go the safe way: let someone else seek barbarous kingdoms.<br>It is a grievous torment to tame untameable beasts,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 140<br>And those just completely tamed will hardly be able to answer you<br>appropriately, since they are unlearned.<br>Many others have tamed the young and untamed;<br>Thus perhaps your effort will be in vain.<br>If by chance you work (the land) in vain, not believing me,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 145<br>And another man should steal away the acres just tamed,<br>Then, eventually, broken by too much shame,<br>You will return to your old paths too late.<br>Others will laugh; but I, always the most faithful.<br>Will share your laments and tears.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;150<br>Therefore I say to you: do not neglect me!<br>You will find no (girl) of greater faith.<br>If you can and will be able, as you seem to want so much,<br>Arrange that I can see you, and come to see me.<br>If I could, I would come over to you as a footsoldier or a knight;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;155<br>Punishment and shame would not be a burden to me.<br>I will come, if I am able; I would have come if I had been able;<br>But my mean step-mother disrupts my journey.<br>But you, who (as) a lord arc not held by any guard.<br>Who step-mother herself fears because you can do many things,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 160<br>Hasten your steps and be here to see me;<br>You have sufficient means and companions.<br>Many an occasion is contrived why you might come to me:<br>"The bishop I must talk to is staying in the city;<br>The clergy summons me, the abbots, or so-and-so and what's-his-name;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;165<br>Some affair I must take care of calls me to the count."<br>Fool! who am I teaching? You yourself should teach me.<br>If you lack some cause, you are neglecting to come!<br>You do not care about me, unless you come to me,<br>Nor does even the slightest love touch your heart.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;170<br>I have set down this argument for myself (so that), if you delay,<br>I would have this sure indication of (our) contract.<br>You should visit me; you do not know what illness ails me,<br>That is to say, what desire afflicts me.<br>Your crime is great if you do not feed one hungering for you,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 175<br>If you yourself do not satisfy one pleading to you.<br>O long awaited one, come, and do not linger long;<br>Often have I called you: &nbsp;you who are called often, come!</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Perlegi vestram studiosa indagine cartam,
Et tetigi nuda carmina vestra manu.
Explicui gaudens bis, terque quaterque volumen,
Nec poteram refici singula discutiens.
Ille liber mihi gratus erat, gratissima dicta.			5
Ergo consumpsi saepe legendo diem. 
Nox studiis odiosa meis, invisa legenti, 
Me cessare meo compulit a studio. 
Composui gremio posuique sub ubere laevo
Schedam, quod cordi junctius esse ferunt.			10
Si possem cordi mandare volumina vestra,
Cordi mandarem singula, non gremio. 
Tandem fessa dedi nocturno membra sopori,                                      
Sed nescit noctem sollicitatus amor. 
Quid non sperabam ? Quid non sperare licebat?			15
Spem liber ediderat, otia nox dederat. 
Insomnis, insomnis eram, quia pagina vestra
Scilicet in gremio viscera torruerat. 
O mihi si dabitur tantum spectare prophetam!			
O mihi si dabitur colloquii morula!                             20 
O quantus vates, quam praeditus iste poeta,
O quam divino quaelibet ore canit, 
Quis sapor in dictis ! O quae sapientia verbi,
0 quam discretus iste vir in calamo!				
Et reor in factis est vir discretior iste,                      25    
Omnia prudenter et facit et loquitur. 
Hunc si Roma sibi quondam meruisset alumnum
Iste Cato rigidus, Tullius iste foret, 
Hunc facerent verba Ciceronem, facta Catonem,			
Multos iste valet solus Aristoteles.                            30
Iste videtur et est et dicitur alter Homerus, 
O quanta versus commoditate canit! 
Historias Grecas et earum mystica novit,
Atque quid haec aut haec fabula significat.		     	
Utque mihi credas, metro mandavit id ipsum,                     35 
Ad sensus fecit copia multiplicis. 
Evaginato David mucrone Goliae,
Ejusdem victor perculit ense caput. 
Taliter hic vates adiens penetralia Greca,			
Gentilesque domos, dispoliavit eas,                             40
Decipulas ensesque suos detorsit in hostes.
Advectans nobis carmine gentis opes, 
Invexit nugas nobis gazasque Pelasgas,
Ex locuplete penu deripiens spolia.				
Quid Mars, quid Juno, quid caetera turba deorum                 45
Significent, novit, novit et exposuit. 
Si de divinis insurgat quaestio dictis, 
Nectareo nodos explicat eloquio. 
Immo quid est, quaeso, quod sensum effregerit ejus?	 	
Omnia sollerti circuit ingenio.                                 50
Si sermo fiat de formae compositura,
Impar est tantae nostra camena rei. 
Inter mortales tanquam flos unius ille
Formosis aliis corpore et ore praeest.			 	 
Inter coelicolas ut conspectissima stella,                      55
Gratior aurora est soleque lucidior. 
0 qualis, quantus mihi carmine significatur,
Versibus hunc video, namque aliter nequeo. 
Vae mihi, cum nequeam quem diligo saepe videre,		
Me miseram, nequeo cernere quod cupio.                          60
Afficior desiderio precibusque diurnis,
Incassum fundo vota precesque deo. 
Annus abit, ex quo quem quaero videre nequivi,
Attamen ipsius carmina saepe lego.                              		
0 quales versus, quam dulces, quam speciosos,                   65
Ad me misit heri perditus ille mihi. 
Hoc jacet in gremio dilecti schedula nostri,
Ecce locata meis subjacet uberibus 
O utinam noster nunc hic dilectus adesset,			
Qui sensum proprii carminis exprimeret:                         70
At circumstarent comites mihi vel duo, vel tres,
Quamvis ipse suae sufficiat fidei. 
Ne tamen ulla foret de suspitione querela, 
Saltem nobiscum sit mea fida soror, 				
Clara dies esset, nec solos nos statuisset,                     75
Hoc fortuna loco, sed magis in trivio. 
Ecce vigil vigilo, quia me liber evigilavit,
Lectus multotiens, quem mihi misi heri. 
Sed quid ago ? Nihil est quod tota nocte voluto,			
Nil est quod rogito pectore sollicito.                          80 
Ad me non veniet, nec cum sitibunda videbo,
Quem nimium tellus Pictava sollicitat. 
Forsitan idcirco miseram me carmina misit,  
Quae me corrigerent, quae mihi verba darent,               		
Ut se dissimulet, ut me sua littera fallat,                     85      
Leniat ut nostrum callida carta metum. 
Heu, quid non timeam ? Nunquam secura quiescam,
Nec mihi tutus amor, nec mihi tuta fides. 
Dum nova dat praecepta mihi plus ipsa fatigor,			
Nunquam non possum suspitiosa fore.                             90
Hunc timeo rapiat dum nescio quilibet error,
Omnis virgo meis invidet auspiciis. 
Nulla quidem virgo me fortunatior esset,
Si mihi tutus amor tutaque pacta forent.				
Firma fides nostrum quamvis mihi firmet amicum,                 95
Credere non possum tuta suae fidei, 
Nec fidei discredo suae nihil inde timendum,
Perdere sed timeo quod vehementer amo. 
Pectore fluctivago deduxi tempora noctis,			
Ergo satis licuit multa referre mihi.                           100
En aurora suos producit lucida currus,
Arbuta jam volucrum garrulitate sonant. 
Aggrediar ceram quia nescit cera pudorem,
Quae referat domino congrua verba meo,			
Multa quidem scribam quae nolim dicere praesens,                105
Virgineos ausus saepe pudor reprimit. 
O utinam placeant quae mens dictabit amantis,
Carminis oda mei gratificetur ei. 
Ipse jubes dilecte meus, tu praecipis, inquam,	        	
Ut castis operam legibus attribuam.                             110
Attribuam, sic ipse jubes, sic ipsa peropto,
Sic hucusque dies disposui proprios.	
Casta fui, sum casta modo, volo vivere casta,
0 utinam possim vivere sponsa dei!				
Non ob id ipsa tamen vestrum detestor amorem,                   115 
Servos sponsa dei debet amare sui. 
Tu sponsi servus, tu frater, tuque coheres,
Tu quoque tu sponsi dignus amore mei, 
Sponsa sui sponsi venerari debet amicos,			
Ergo te veneror, te vigilanter amo.                             120
Jus et lex nostrum semper tueatur amorem,
Commendet nostros vita pudica jocos. 
Ergo columbinam teneamus simplicitatem,
Nec mihi praetendas quamlibet ulterius.				
Quod si praeponis, quod si praetenderis ullam,                  125
Scito quod non est hic jocus in domino. 
Si fallis, malus es, si verum dicis, iniquus,
Obsidet atque tenet crimen utrumque jocum. 
Dampnat falsiloquos deus et prave facientes,			
Aut hoc aut illud vel simul ambo facis.                         130
Sed deus amendet, deus in te corrigat ista,
Haec me cura tui non sinit immemorem. 
Virginis alterius sic nomen abominor, ut sim
Virginis ad nomen frigidior glaciae.				
Sed sicut tibi vis credam credamque volenti,                    135   
Credam dictanti, tu quoque credi mihi. 
Si te Roma vocat, si te Magontia temptat,
Si meus es, retrahas mox ab utraque pedem. 
Vade, viam tutam petat alter barbara regna,			
Est gravis indomitas poena domare feras.                        140
Atque tibi digne vix respondere valebunt,
Num sint indoctae protinus edomitae.
Pullos indomitos aliis multi domuerunt,
Sic fortasse labor vester inanis erit.				
Si mihi discredens incassum forte laboras,                      145
Subripiatque alter jugera vix domita, 
Affectus nimio tandem tunc ipse pudore,
Ad veteres sero regrediere vias, 
Ridebunt alii, sed ego fidissima semper				
Planctibus et lacrymis participabo tuis.                        150
Ergo dico tibi, me praetermittere noli,
Nullam majoris invenies fidei. 
Si potes, et poteris, si tantum velle videris,
Fac ut te videam, meque videre veni.				
Ad te si possem pedes aut eques ultro venirem,                  155  
Non essent oneri poena pudorque mihi. 
Venero si potero, venissem si potuissem,
Sed disturbat iter saeva noverca meum. 
At tu qui dominus nullo custode teneris,				
Quem, quia multa potes, ipsa noverca timet,                     160
Maturato gradus, et me visurus adesto
Sumptus et comites sufficienter habes. 
Cur ad nos venias occasio multa paratur.
Ad quem sermo mihi praesul in urbe manet,			
Clerus me mandat, abbates, ille vel ille,                       165
Me trahit ad comitem res facienda mihi 
Demens, quem doceo ? Me debes ipse docere,
Si tibi causa deest, negligis ut venias. 
Cura tibi de me non est nisi veneris ad me,			
Nec tua vel modicus viscera tangit amor.                        170
Hoc argumentum posui mihi si pigritaris,
Hoc habeam certum foederis indicium. 
Visere me debes, nescis quo langueo morbo,
Quo desiderio scilicet afficior. 			        
Grande tibi crimen ni paveris esurientem,                       175
Oranti si non ipse satis facias. 
Exspectate veni, nolique diu remorari, 
Saepe vocavi te, saepe vocate veni.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Constance responds to Baudri's letter, treating it as an physical extension of the poet, praising him with exaggerated classical comparisons, and longing for his presence.&nbsp; As a bride of God, she justifies her feelings for him as her groom's devoted servant.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Original text from Baudri de Bourgueil, <em>Oeuvres Poétiques</em>, ed. Phyllis Abraham (Paris: &nbsp;Champion, 1926, repr.Geneva:&nbsp; Slatkine, 1974), 344-49, #CCXXXIX.&nbsp; Translation from&nbsp;Gerald A. Bond, <em>The Loving Subject, Desire, Eloquence, and Power in Romanesque France</em> (Philadelphia: &nbsp;University of Pennsylvania, 1995), 183-93, Appendix III, reprinted with permission of the press: &nbsp;<a href="http://www.upenn.edu/pennpress/book/214.html">http://www.upenn.edu/pennpress/book/214.html</a></p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>before 1107