---
letter_id: "26115"
title: "A poem from Baudri"
ititle: "a poem from baudri"
ltr_date: "before 1107"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2018-12-17"
modified: "2021-11-26"
url: "/letter/26115.html"
senders:
  - id: 21270
    name: Baudri, abbot of Bourgueil and archbishop of Dol
    iname: baudri, abbot of bourgueil and archbishop of dol
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 26114
    name: Constance of Le Ronceray
    iname: constance of le ronceray
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Read through this letter, and carefully clasp it once read,<br>Lest malignant tongues harm my reputation.<br>Read through my verse by yourself with careful hunting,<br>Read through it, whatever it is; a friend's hand wrote it.<br>A friend's hand wrote it, and the same friend fashioned it;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 5<br>The same man who wrote these verses, composed them.<br>What this letter speaks of is love and love poetry,<br>And yet no venom lies hidden in the letter's touch.<br>My page is not smeared with the Gorgon's blood,<br>Nor does Medea secretly accompany my work.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 10<br>Fear not the Hydra, waver not before the Chimaera<br>As (your) bare hand touches the bare page.<br>You yourself can safely open this letter,<br>And you can safely put it in your lap.<br>Oh, if only you knew, as my heart knows,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 15<br>How valuable you are to me, how much I make you mine.<br>To me you are more valuable and better, greater finally<br>than a Goddess to mortals, than a girl, or than any love might be.<br>You are more valuable to me than Leda's daughter to Paris,<br>Than Venus to Mars, than the goddess Juno to Jupiter.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 20<br>Neither Danae [ms, ed: Daphne] nor Io were worth so much,<br>For whom Jupiter was a shower of gold and a bull.<br>When Orpheus, the mournful bard, braved the Stygian waves,<br>He did not regard Eurydice [to be] of greater value.<br>But Greek myth commends these men to people,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 25<br>For the deed comes to us covered in some sort of mist.<br>But once mists and trifles have been dispersed,<br>true love does not allow me to forget you anywhere.<br>I can never forget you, Constance,<br>Your beauty docs not allow me to forget you; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 30<br>I could sooner forget myself, Constance,<br>Than myself be compelled to forget you.<br>May you never be able so to forget me, Constance,<br>That you dissolve the very bond of my love.<br>Oh, if only God and nature had bound us together&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 35<br>So that neither should live forgetting the other.<br>Believe me (and I want both you and the readers to believe):<br>A filthy love has never driven me to you.<br>I want virginity to live in you as a fellow citizen,<br>I do not want chastity to be shattered in you;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;40<br>You are a girl, I a man: I am young, you are younger.<br>I swear by all that is: I do not want to be your husband.<br>I do not want to be your husband, nor you to be my wife:<br>Let mouth and heart confirm our friendship.<br>Let our hearts be joined, but our bodies remain apart;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 45<br>Let the shame be in the act, let the game be in the pen.<br>Believe me (and I want both you and the readers to believe):<br>A filthy love has never driven me to you.<br>Neither lascivious love nor a love of wanton love<br>Stirs up the depths of my heart5 on account of you.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 50<br>Your learned writing has moved my feeling for you,<br>And your Muse has joined me to you deep within.<br>In short, so much eloquence lives in your tongue<br>That you could be believed to be, a Sibyl, and are to me.<br>The binomial planet Venus does not shine so bright&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 55<br>As both your bright eyes shine.<br>One look at your hair, and I judge gold to be less yellow;<br>Your neck gleams more than lilies or fresh snow.<br>Your teeth shine whiter than ivory, than Parian marble,<br>And a lively grace breathes upon your lips.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 60<br>Your lips swell somewhat; they have a firey warmth and color,<br>But an appropriate modesty caresses them both.<br>It is right that I put your tender little cheeks before the roses,<br>Cheeks dressed in red and white and every charm.<br>Let me express briefly the composition of (your) body: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 65<br>It is a body which suits such beauty.<br>You yourself could seduce high Jupiter from the heavens,<br>If the Greek myth about Jupiter were true;<br>He would have fashioned himself in whatever shape you wish.<br>If his age had [not] preceeded you by centuries.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 70<br>But whatever you do, and whoever you can divert,<br>I am not distracted in different directions because of you.<br>Neither my flesh nor my heart itches for you;<br>But, nevertheless, I ardently love you without deceit.<br>I love you ardently, all of me will love all of you,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 75<br>You alone do I enfold within my heart.<br>Therefore, it is clearly visible that this kind of love<br>Tastes of something not common, but special.<br>It is a special love, which neither the flesh accompanies<br>Secretly nor illicit desire wounds.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 80<br>I myself am always the lover of your virginity,<br>I love the cleanness of your flesh.<br>I do not wish that your mind be violated even a little bit on account of me:<br>Hope would be aroused, suspicion aroused.<br>For this reason I depicted your beauty in verse&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 85<br>So that your outer beauty expresses the beauty of your character.<br>Let the girl as beautiful as a flower show her flowery ways,<br>So that she flowers more inside than outside.<br>This pagan page is inserted in my poem<br>In order that I might distance you from false people, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 90<br>So that for you that people might be pagan and that page base<br>Which worships the impure and half-male gods<br>Who frequented the whoring brothels, rather<br>Than give this service to virtuous matters.<br>But nevertheless it is true that your charming beauty&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<i>&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 95<br></i>Transcends the stars, since it is the image of God.<br>Jupiter exists even today, and tries to play with you,<br>And Mars, too, if you should favor Mars and Jupiter.<br>There are many youths following the impious deeds of Jupiter.<br>And I say, not undeservedly, that they are Jupiters.&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 100<br>There are many Marses, and traces of his old crimes;<br>These youths foul the realms of chastity beyond measure.<br>They create Venuses and Junos, Danae and Io;<br>In truth, hardly one companion of Astrea escapes them.<br>Just as there are examples of old evils in books,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 105<br>So too are good deeds placed in them which you might do.<br>Diana is praised for her proper virginity:<br>Perseus is exalted as the victor of the monster.<br>The might of Alcidean Hercules is revealed through many acts.<br>All such things, if you know them, are allegorical.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 11o<br>Therefore, let us put aside the perverse and foul men,<br>And undertake our journey in another direction.<br>Let us tread the path of virtues, let us walk to the stars;<br>Even pagans advise us to hasten thus.<br>If you wish to live as mine, you will live as mine; live (as) Diana!&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 115<br>I wish to imitate Alcidean Hercules or Bellerophon.<br>But if you require examples from my books,<br>You will find as many as you see tips (of letters).<br>Not one tip, not one stroke spends time in my books<br>that does not teach us to thirst for lofty things.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 120<br>But I wanted to put forward the Greek trifles as proof<br>That every literature of the world teaches us,<br>That the whole world speaks as with one tongue<br>And that each and every man educates us.<br>I bring here the captive pagan trifles;&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;125<br>I, the victor, rejoice in my captive spoils.<br>Let the rich Pregnaria have captive servants;<br>Let the Cambio rejoice in Greek slaves.<br>Captive Athens is now being captured at Bourgueil,<br>Barbaric Greece now serves Bourgueil.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 130<br>Let the Latin tongue be enriched by enemy booty;<br>Let the vanquished Greek and Hebrew serve.<br>Let us not miss reading's lesson in any (of them);<br>Let evervthing that is, be book and text for us.<br>Thus my letter attempts this lofty goal&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;135<br>So that you, girl, may live as a virgin pleasing to God.<br>As the bride of my Lord, may you be the court of such a spouse,<br>And as spouse be the bridal chamber of such a spouse.<br>Let the Lord cast him down who cast down his temple,<br>He who, himself a stone, destroys living stones.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 140<br>But let the strength of our integrity unite us to each other;<br>Let there be chaste entrances and chaste conversations.<br>But if someone should blame us for having said playful things,<br>I am not a solemn man: whatever I do is a game.<br>A happy nature has made life playful for me,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 145<br>And a congenial vein has given me a cheerful character.<br>But whatever I say, let my deeds retain modesty;<br>Let my heart live in honor as pure, my mind as chaste.<br>This province rears many to be sad and lewd,<br>And this same province raises others chaste and cheerful.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 150<br>I also know many who live their lives like a Bacchic festival,<br>Whose sad brow makes them resemble the Curii.<br>&nbsp;I do not despair that age may take away these games;<br>The later years will give ripe fruits.<br>With a serious face I will then write only serious things&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 155<br>So that my heart and pen may then be in harmony.<br>Meanwhile, my girl, believe in what I have written<br>And, as I wrote, so live and fare well as mine.<br>Live, I say, farewell: do what I want, live as I wish.<br>You are not ignorant of what I want: everything I wish, you know.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 160<br>No vein of my heart could lie hidden from you;<br>I have written you everthing that I want, that I have wanted.<br>From now on my Muse will spend time with a greater task;<br>Now colleagues demand anew the [exegesis of] Moses I began.<br>No doubt they jump up (in anger)12 because I split Genesis in half,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;165<br>And that, exhausted, I halted in the middle of the road.<br>They reproach the trifles I busily compose for you;<br>My verses know none but you.<br>But if you should attempt to write back anything to me,<br>Make sure that I see whatever you have sent.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 170<br>I will not be silent after the interruption of my task<br>And not write back sometime, at least to say "farewell."<br>But when I say "farewell," understand this "farewell" as "hello";<br>My last spoken word to you will not be that "farewell."<br>Even though they usually offer this word to the dead,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 175<br>I give and will give this word to the living.<br>If you wish, display what I have written; hide it if you wish;<br>For fear is not the teacher for a good lady.<br>&nbsp;</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Perlege, perlectam caute complectere cartam,<br>Ne noceat famae lingua maligna meae.<br>Perlege sola meos versus indagine cauta,<br>Perlege, quicquid id est, scripsit amica manus.<br>Scripsit amica manus, et idem dictavit amicus,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 5<br>Idem qui scripsit carmina composuit.<br>Quod sonat iste brevis amor est et carmen amoris,<br>Inque brevis tactu nulla venena latent.<br>Sanguine Gorgoneo non est lita pagina nostra,<br>Nec Medea meum subcomitatur opus.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 10<br>Non timeas Ydram, noli dubitare Chymeram,<br>Dum tanget nudam nuda manus folium.<br>Ipsa potes nostram secura revolvere cartam,<br>Inque tuo gremio ponere tuta potes.<br>O utinam nosses sicut mea viscera norunt&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 15<br>Quanti sis mecum, quam mihi te facio.<br>Pluris es et melior, major mihi denique vivis<br>Quam dea, quam virgo, quamve sit ullus amor.<br>Pluris es ipsa mihi Paridi quam filia Ledae,<br>Quamque Venus Marti, quam dea Juno Jovi.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 20<br>Nec tanti Dafnes, neque tanti constitit Io<br>Pro quibus aurum et bos Jupiter ipse fuit.<br>Vates et Stygias querulus cum tenderet undas,<br>Non habuit pluris Orpheus Euridicem.<br>Hos autem populis commendat fabula Greca,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 25<br>Nam nebula quadam res adoperta venit.<br>Sed me verus amor nugis nebulisque remotis<br>Esse tui nusquam desinit immemorem.<br>Immemor esse tui numquam, Constantia, possum<br>Quem tua forma tui non sinit immemorem.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 3o<br>Immemor esse mei citius, Constancia, possem<br>Quam conpellor ego non memor esse tui.<br>lmmemor esse mei nunquam, Constancia, possis,<br>Ut mihi persolvas foedus amoris idem.<br>Sic nos o utinam natura deusque ligasset,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;35<br>Ut neuter vivat immemor alterius.<br>Crede mihi, credasque volo, credantque legentes,<br>In te me nunquam foedus adegit amor.<br>In te concivem volo vivere virginitatem,<br>In te confringi nolo pudicitiam.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 4o<br>Tu virgo, vir ego, juvenis sum, junior es tu;<br>Juro per omne quod est : Nolo vir esse tibi.<br>Nolo vir esse tibi neque tu sis femina nobis,<br>Os et cor nostram firmet amicitiam.<br>Pectora jugantur, sed corpora semoveantur.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 45<br>Sit pudor in facto, sit jocus in calamo.<br>Crede mihi, credasque volo, credantque legentes,<br>In te nunquam foedus adegit amor.<br>Nec lascivus amor, nec amor petulantis amoris,<br>Pro te subvertit corque jecurque meum.&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 5o<br>In te sed nostrum movit tua littera sensum,<br>Et penitus junxit me tua musa tibi.<br>Denique tanta tuse vivit fecundia lingue<br>Ut possis credi, sisque Sibilla mihi.<br>Non rutilat Veneris tam clara binomia stella,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 55<br>Quam rutilant ambo lumina clara tibi.<br>Crinibus inspectis fulvam minus abitror aurum,<br>Colla nitent plusquam lilia, nixve recens,<br>Dentes plus ebore Pario plus marmore candent,<br>Spirat et in labiis gratia viva tuis.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 6o<br>Labra tument modicum calor et calor igneus illis,<br>Quae tamen ambo decens temperies foveat.<br>Jure rosis malas praeponi dico tenellas,<br>Quas rubor et candor vestit et omne decus.<br>Corporis ut breviter complectar composituram,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 65<br>Est corpus talem quod deceat faciem.<br>Ipsa Jovern summum posses deducere coelo,<br>De Jove si verax fabula Greca foret.<br>In quascumque velis se formas effigiasset,<br>Si tua te saeclis tempora praestiterint. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 70<br>Sed quicquid facias, quemcumque avertere possis,<br>Non pro te partes distrahor in varias.<br>Nec caro titillat pro te neque viscera nostra,<br>Attamen absque dolo te vehementer amo.<br>Te vehementer amo, te totam totus amabo,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 75<br>Te solam nostris implico visceribus.<br>Ergo patet liquido quoniam genus istud amoris<br>Non commune aliquid sed speciale sapit.<br>Est specialis amor, quem nec caro subcomitatur,<br>Nec desiderium sauciat illicitum.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 80<br>Ipse tuae semper sum virginitatis amator,<br>Ipse tuae carnis diligo munditiam.<br>Nolo vel ad modicum pro me tua mens violetur,<br>Irrita spes esset, irrita suspitio.<br>Propter id ergo tuam depinxi carmine formam,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 85<br>Ut morum formam extima forma notet.<br>Mores florigeros praetendat florida virgo,<br>Ut plus quam exterius floreat interius.<br>[In]serviat metro gentilis pagina nostro,&nbsp;<br>[Ut mentem de] falsis gentibus amoveam.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 90<br>Ut tibi gentilis sit gens et pagina vilis,<br>Quae colit impuros semimaresque deos.<br>Qui meretricales potius coluere tabernas,<br>Rebus honestatis quam dederunt operam.<br>Et tamen est verum quam tua forma venusta&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 95<br>Sidera transcendit, cum sit imago dei.<br>Jupiter instat adhuc et tecum ludere temptat,<br>Mars quoque si Marti faveris atque Jovi<br>Sunt multi juvenes Jovis impia facta sequentes,<br>Quos non immerito dicimus esse Joves.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;100<br>Sunt multi Martes, scelerum vestigia prisca,<br>Hi nimis infestant regna pudicitiae<br>Hi faciunt Veneres, Junones, Dafnen et Io,<br>Astrae vero vix latet una comes.<br>Ut sunt in veterum libris exempla malorum,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1o5<br>Sic bona quae facias sunt in eis posita.<br>Laudatur propria pro virginitate Diana,<br>Portenti victor, Perseus exprimatur.<br>Alcidis vertus per multos panditur actus;<br>Omnia si nosti talia mystica sunt.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 11o<br>Ergo sepositis lenonibus et maculosis,<br>Alterius partis aggrediamur iter.<br>Virtutum gradiamur iter, gradiamur ad astra,<br>Gentiles etiam sic properare monent.<br>Si mea vivere vis, vives mea, vive Diana ; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 115<br>Alcidem volo vel Bellorofonta sequi.<br>Quod si de libris nostris exempla requiris,<br>Ipsa tot invenies quot videas apices.<br>In nostris non unus apex, non linea libris,<br>Quae nos non doceat alta sitire, vacat.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 120<br>Sed volui Grecas ideo praetendere nugas,<br>Ut quaevis mundi littera nos doceat,<br>Ut totus mundus velut unica lingua loquatur,<br>Et nos erudiat omnis et omnis homo.<br>Captivos ideo gentiles adveho nugas,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 125<br>Laetor captivis victor ego spoliis.<br>Dives captivos habeat Pregnaria servos,<br>Laetetur Grais Cambio mancipiis.<br>Burgulii victae nec captivantur Athenae,<br>Barbara nec servit Grecia Burgulio.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 130<br>Hostili praeda diletur lingua latina,<br>Grecus et Hebreus serviat edomitus.<br>In nullis nobis desit doctrina legendi,<br>Lectio sit nobis et liber omne quod est.<br>Hanc igitur summam pertemptat epistola nostra&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 135<br>Ut virgo vivas, virgo deo placita.<br>Sponsa mei domini sis tanti conjugis aula,<br>Sis conjunx tanti conjugis et thalamus.<br>Subruat hunc dominus qui templum subruit ejus,<br>Qui lapides vivos ipse lapis perimit.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 140<br>Nos autem nobis vigor uniat integritatis,<br>Sint casti acessus, castaque colloquia.<br>Quod si nos aliquid dixisse jocosa remordet,<br>Non sum durus homo, quicquid ago jocus est.<br>Laeta mihi vitam fecit natura jocosam, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 145<br>Et mores hilares vena benigna dedit.<br>Sed quicquid dicam, teneant mea facta pudorem,<br>Cor mundum vigeat, mensque pudica mihi.<br>Tristes obscenos alit haec provincia multos,<br>Et castos hilares educat haec eadem.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 150<br>Novimus et multos qui Baccanalia vivunt,<br>Quos curios simulat triste supercilium.<br>Nec despero jocos quin aetas auferat istos,<br>Fructus matures tempera sera dabunt.<br>Fronte severus tunc tantummodo seria scribam,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;155<br>Ut mihi tunc pectus consonet et calamus.<br>Interea mea virgo meis sis credula scriptis,<br>Et sicut scripsi, sic mea vive, vale.<br>Inquam vive, vale, fac quod volo, vive quod opto,<br>Quod volo non nescis, omne quod opto sapis.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 160<br>Nulla mei cordis potuit te vena latere,<br>Omne tibi scripsi quod volo, quod volui.<br>A modo majori studio mea musa vacabit;<br>Inceptum Moysen jam repetunt socii,<br>Scilicet insultant Genesim quia dimidiavi, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 165<br>Defessusque via substiterim media;<br>Improperant nugas quas scriptito sedulus ad te<br>Nullam praeter te carmina nostra sciunt.<br>Si tamen ipsa mihi quicquam rescribere temptas,<br>Attendam quicquid miseris ut videam.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 170<br>Nec studii nostri post intervallo silebo,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;<br>Quin tibi rescribam saltem aliquando vale.<br>Dum tibi dico vale, vale hoc intellige, salve,<br>Ultima vox ad te non erit ista, vale.<br>Quamvis hoc verbum soleant praestare sepultis,&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 175<br>Nos tamen hoc vivis et damus et dabimus.<br>Si vis ostendas, si vis haec scripta recondas,<br>Nam pedagoga bonae non limor est dominae.<br>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Baudri sends Constance a poem declaring his intense but innocent love, but many of his classical allusions and his praise of her beauty have erotic overtones.&nbsp; The two streams he mentions, the Cambio and its tributary the Pregnaria run through Bourgueil.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Original text from&nbsp;Baudri de Bourgueil, <em>Oeuvres Poétiques</em>, ed. Phyllis Abraham (Paris: &nbsp;Champion, 1926, repr.Geneva:&nbsp; Slatkine, 1974), 337-42, #CCXXXVIII.&nbsp; &nbsp;Translation from Gerald A. Bond, <em>The Loving Subject, Desire, Eloquence, and Power in Romanesque France</em> (Philadelphia: &nbsp;University of Pennsylvania, 1995), Appendix II, 171-81, reprinted with permission of the press: &nbsp;<a href="http://www.upenn.edu/pennpress/book/214.html">http://www.upenn.edu/pennpress/book/214.html</a></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>before 1107