---
letter_id: "26135"
title: "A letter of permission"
ititle: "a letter of permission"
ltr_date: "1058"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2019-04-30"
modified: "2020-03-06"
url: "/letter/26135.html"
senders:
  - id: 116
    name: Anne of Kiev
    iname: anne of kiev
    type: woman
    url: /woman/116.html
  - id: 26131
    name: Henry I, king of the Franks
    iname: henry i, king of the franks
    type: people
    url: /people/26131.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the holy and individual trinity, father and son and holy spirit. I Henry, by the grace of God king of the Franks, wish it to be known to those in the present and future that the Fossé monks came to me and asked that I pardon them the customs on beef and meat which my ministers in Mozac(?) and Courcelles had seized unjustly and by force. Which I did; so that now no one of those in my service may receive anything in these two towns, nor seize anything at all, nor enter them by violence. Which, if they should do, they must either amend or be punished [corripiantur]. Which if my cooks should want to receive meat in the fields, if they found it, they could accept and buy it: but they may never enter the towns. I made this concession for the healing/remedy of my soul, with the assent of my wife Anna, and sons Philip, Robert and Hugo. If anyone should wish to break this, he must pay twenty pounds of gold. Enacted at Melun, 4th ides of July.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine sanctae et individuae trinitatis, patris et filii et spiritus sancti. Ego Henricus, Francorum Dei gratia Rex, notum esse volo praesentibus ac futuris, quia meam adierunt praesentiam monachi Fossatenses, meque petierunt, quatenus eis perdonarem consuetudines de bobus, de carne, quas mei ministri in Mosyniaco et in Curciolis injuste, et per vim rapiebant. Quod et feci; ita ut amodo nemo meorum servientum in his duabus villis aliquis accipiat, neque rapiat ullam omnino rem, neque intus per violentiam intrent. Quod si fecerint, aut emendent, aut corripiantur. Quod si mei cocci carnem accipere voluerint in campis, si invenerint, accipiant et emant: in villis vero nequaquam intrent. Istam concessionem pro remedio animae meae feci, annuente mea conjuge Anna, et prole Philippo, Roberto ac Hugone. Quam si quis infringere voluerit, vigenti auri libras componat. Actum Meleduno, IV Idus Julii.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The king and queen give permission for Saint-Maur-des-Fossés to exercise customs on beef and meat previously “unjustly” exercised by royal officers. Anne is named as “co-issuer” by Talia Zajac.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Labanoff de Rostoff, <em>Recueil des pièces historiques sur la reine Anne ou Agnès</em> (Paris: Firmin Didot, 1825) #1, 1-2.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1058