---
letter_id: "26143"
title: "A grant of immunity"
ititle: "a grant of immunity"
ltr_date: "1229, May 15"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2019-06-19"
modified: "2019-06-19"
url: "/letter/26143.html"
senders:
  - id: 21365
    name: Gregory IX, pope
    iname: gregory ix, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21365.html
  - id: 26141
    name: Gremislava of Lutsk
    iname: gremislava of lutsk
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26141.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Gregory, bishop, servant of the servants of god to his beloved sons the abbot and convent of the monastery of Tyniec, greetings and apostolic benediction.&nbsp; The apostolic see is accustomed to grant benevolent favor to the pious vows and honorable desires of petitioners.&nbsp; On account of which, beloved sons in the lord, agreeing to your requests with glad assent, we confirm to you and your said monastery by apostolic authority the freedoms and exemptions from secular taxes, which are called “slone” in the vulgate, granted by the noble woman Gremislava, widow of L[eszek ], duke of Poland of bright memory, for the remedy of the soul of that duke, her husband, on the model of Kasimir, former duke of Poland, her father-in-law, to the men of Vizloca, Bala and Dunaies, towns of your monastery, with pious generosity, as you obtain them justly and peacefully, and is fully contained in her letters composed for that, and we strengthen them by the patronage of this writing.&nbsp; It is therefore permitted to no man at all to breach this page of our confirmation or to opposed it by bold daring.&nbsp; If however anytone should dare to attempt this, let him know that he will incur the indignation of almighty god and the apostle saints Peter and Paul.&nbsp; Dated/given at Perugia on the ides of May, in the third year of our pontificate.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Gregorius episcopus servus servorum dei dilectis filiis abbati et conventui monasterii Tinciensis salutem et apostolicam benedictionem. Solet annuere sedes apostolica piis votis et honestis petentium desideriis favorem benivolum impertiri. Quapropter, dilecti in domino filii, vestris postulationibus grato concurrentes assensu libertates et exemptiones saecularium exactionum, quae “slone” vulgariter appellantur, a nobili muliere Grimizslava, relicta clarae memoriae L. ducis Poloniae, pro remedio animae ducis eiusdem viri sui, ad exemplar quondam Kasimiri ducis Poloniae soceri sui hominibus de Vizloca, Bala et Dunaies villarum monasterii vestri pia liberalitate concessas, sicut eas iuste ac pacifice obtinetis et in ipsius literis exinde confectis plenius continetur, vobis et per vos dicto monasterio vestro auctoritate apostolica confirmamus et praesentis scripti patrocinio communimus. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae confirmationis infringere aut ei ausu temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit, indignationem omnipotentis dei et beatorum Petri et Pauli apostolorum eius se noverit incursurum. Datum Perusii idus Maii, pontificatus nostri anno tertio.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Gremislava grants immunities to the free peasants of the Benedictine monastery of Tyniec.&nbsp; Her charter is know from this confirmation by Pope Gregory IX.&nbsp; I am grateful to Talia Zajac for the reference to this charter.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Codex diplomaticus monasterii Tynecensis/Kodeks dyplomatyczny klasztoru tyniekciego.</em> Cz. 1: Obejmująca rzeczy od roku 1105 do roku 1399, ed. Wojciech Kętrzyński and Stanisław Smolka (Lwów: Zakład Narodowy im&nbsp; Ossolińskich, 1875), no. 9, 17.&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1229, May 15