---
letter_id: "26148"
title: "A letter of confirmation"
ititle: "a letter of confirmation"
ltr_date: "1231"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2019-06-20"
modified: "2021-04-09"
url: "/letter/26148.html"
senders:
  - id: 26144
    name: Boleslaw V
    iname: boleslaw v
    type: people
    url: /people/26144.html
  - id: 26141
    name: Gremislava of Lutsk
    iname: gremislava of lutsk
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26141.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the father and the son and the holy spirit Amen.&nbsp; Let everyone who will see the present writing know that we, Gremislava, by the grace of god Duchess of Sandomierz, with our son Boleslaw, confirm the donation of countess Miloslava, namely the widow of count Govoricy, which with our consent conferred a certain estate by name Mogilany on count Theodore palatine of Kraków, to be possessed by him by hereditary right, or freely conferred on some monastery for his soul, that is freely as said Govoricy held it by hereditary right, or his son Dirsicraius, from the gift of our husband of good memory, Leszek Duke of Kraków, Sandomierz, and Luchicia (?&nbsp;Łęczyca&nbsp;).&nbsp; But so that this donation may be held firmly for posterity, we have held it proper that it be reinforced both with our Seal, and with the witness of the nobles present.&nbsp; Of whom these are the names:&nbsp; Pacoslaw son of Lassote, another Pacoslaw son of Albert, Clement, son of Clement, Pretslaw zaya, Clement son of Sulislaw with his three brothers, Bucha son of Vitaly, Getca and many others. This was enacted in the 1231st year of the lord.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine patris et filij et spiritus sancti Amen. Nouerint vniuersi presens scriptum&nbsp;inspecturi, quod nos Grimislaua dei gracia Sandomirie Ducissa, cum filio nostro Boleslao&nbsp;confirmamus donationem comitisse Milozcelaue, scilicet relicte comitis Gouoricij, que de&nbsp;consensu nostro contulit quandam villam nomine <i>Mogilani</i> comitj Theodoro cracouie&nbsp;palatino, hereditario jure sibi possidendam, siue alicuj claustro pro anima sua libere&nbsp;conferendam, sicut eam libere, id est hereditario iure tenuit dictus Gouoritius, aut filius eius&nbsp;dirsicraius, ex donatione mariti nostri bone memorie Lestconis, Ducis cracouie, Sandomirie&nbsp;et Luchicie. Porro ut hec donatio firmiter in posterum teneatur, dignum duximus eam esse&nbsp;roborandam tam nostro Sigillo, quam presentium nobilium testimonio. Quorum hec sunt&nbsp;nomina: Pacoslaus filius Lassote, Alius Pacoslaus filius alberti, Clemens filius clementis,&nbsp;Pretslaus zaya, Clemens filius Sulislaui cum suis tribus fratribus, Bucha filius Vitalis, Getca&nbsp;et alij multi. Actum est autem istud Anno domini M° cc°. xxx°. primo.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Gremislava confirms the donation of an estate in Mogilany by countess Miloslava to Theodore,&nbsp;the palatine of Kraków.&nbsp;&nbsp;I am grateful to Talia Zajac for the reference to this charter.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i><span>Kodeks dyplomatyczny Małopolski</span></i><span>, vol. 1: <i>1178-1386, </i>&nbsp;<i>Monumenta Medii Aevi Historica Res Gestas Polonii Illustrantia Tomus III continet: Codicem Diplomaticum Poloniae Minoris, 1178-1386</i> , ed. Franciszek Piekosiński (Kraków: Akademia Umiejętności/Academia Literarum Craoviensis, 1876), &nbsp;no.13, p.20.&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1231