---
letter_id: "26173"
title: "A charter of confirmation"
ititle: "a charter of confirmation"
ltr_date: "1163"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2019-10-10"
modified: "2020-06-27"
url: "/letter/26173.html"
senders:
  - id: 26170
    name: Euphrosyne Mstislavna of Kiev 
    iname: euphrosyne mstislavna of kiev 
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26170.html
  - id: 26171
    name: Istvan III, king of Hungary
    iname: istvan iii, king of hungary
    type: people
    url: /people/26171.html
receivers:
  - id: 26172
    name: Archbishop Peter of Split
    iname: archbishop peter of split
    type: people
    url: /people/26172.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the holy and individual trinity.&nbsp; I Stephen, son of the lord king Geza, by the grace of god king of Hungary, Dalmatia, Croatia and Rama,* together with the lady queen my mother and my princes, I confirm to St. Domnius,** and to you Peter our faithful archbishop, the precept and subjection which our illustrious father made to all the bishops in Dalmatia and all the parishes which your predecessors held, and particularly the parish of Krbava, Bugani, Plasi, and Vallis Vinaria; we confirm by royal authority the chapel of Modrussa, Novigrad and also St. Stephen and St. Moses of Salona, with all that pertains to them, which our father king Geza granted to that church of St. Domnius, ordering that it is not permitted to any man/lord, provincial governor (banus), prince, count or any of our ministers, to harm, trouble, diminish or defraud that church or its archbishop or in said things, from the said subjection and order given to the bishops.&nbsp; Whoever might presume to violate the page of our confirmation, will incur the wrath of almighty god and our indignation, with the paternal donation and order and our confirmation obtaining its strength no less.&nbsp; Given by the hand of Stephen, chancellor, chaplain of our lady queen in the parish of Titul, in the presence of the bishops:&nbsp; Rodan of Nona, Lampridius of Scardonen, and Deda of Croatia; in the presence of counts:&nbsp; &nbsp;Martin of Spala, sons Gregory of Slovenia and Cotroman, in the second year of our reign, the thousand one hundred sixty third from the incarnation of Christ.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><div><p>In nomine sancte et indiuidue unitatis. Ego Stephanus domini regis Geize filius, dei gratia Hungarie, Dalmatie; Chroatie, Rameque rex, una cum domina regina matre mea, et principibus meis, confirmo beato Domnio, et tibi Petro archiepiscopo fideli nostro, preceptionem et subiectionem, quam fecit illustris pater noster omnibus episcopis per Dalmatiam constitutis, et omnes parochias, quas predecessores tui tenuerunt, et maxime parochiam Corbauie, Bugani, Plasi, et Vallis vinarie; Modrusse, Novigradi, capellanam etiam sancti Stophani et sancti Moysi de Salona, cum omnibus ad eas pertinentibus, quas pater noster rex Geyza concessit eidem ecclesie sancti Domnii, auctoritate regia confirmamus, precipientes, ut non liceat alicui hominum/dominum, bano, principi, comiti, siue cuilibet ministrorum nostrorum, ipsam ecclesiam, siue archiepiscopum ipsius, de prefata subiectione et preceptione facta episcopis, siue depredictis rebus molestare, inquietare, minuere, vel defraudare. Quicumque vero hujus nostre confirmationis paginam violare presumpserit, iram omnipotentis dei, et nostram indignationem incurrat, paterna donatione et preceptione, confirmatione quoque nostra, nihilominus suum robur obtinentibus. Datum per manum Stephani cancellarii, domine regine capellani in parochia Tituli, in presentia episcoporum:&nbsp;&nbsp;Rodani nonensis, Lampridii scardonensis, et Dede Chroatiensis, in presentia comitum: Martini Spalatensis, et Gregorii Sclouinie filii, et Cotromani, secundo anno regni nostri, anno incarnationis Christi millesimo centesimo sexagesimo tertio.</p><p>&nbsp;</p></div><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p><span>King István/Stephen III and his mother Euphrosyne confirm the donations and immunities that Géza II had granted to the Archbishopric of Split and all the parishes subject to it.&nbsp; &nbsp;The charter was drawn up by the royal chancellor and the queen’s chaplain.&nbsp; &nbsp;I am grateful to Natalia Zajac for alterting me to the existence of this charter.</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>*&nbsp; Rama was a river in Bosnia.&nbsp;&nbsp;King Béla II of&nbsp;Hungary styled himself King of&nbsp;Rama in 1137 to signify his control of Bosnia.</p><p>** St. Domnius, a bishop of Salona in the 4th century, is patron saint of Split in Croatia.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><div><p>Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski, ed., <i>Codex diplomaticus Regni Croatiae, Dalmatiae et Slavoniae/Diplomatički Sbornik Kraljevine Hrvatske s Dalmacijom i Slavonijom</i>, Book 3, Part 2: &nbsp;<i>Ad Annum 1102. Usque Ad. Annum 1200/Od Godine 1102-1200</i> (Zagreb: Dragutin Albrecht, 1875), 66,&nbsp; # 88.&nbsp; It also appears in the <em>Codex diplomaticus</em> ed. T. Smiciklas (Zagreb, 1904-34), 2.96-97, #93.</p></div><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1163