---
letter_id: "26244"
title: "A request for investigation"
ititle: "a request for investigation"
ltr_date: "1296, November 8"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2020-07-01"
modified: "2020-07-01"
url: "/letter/26244.html"
senders:
  - id: 26240
    name: Thomasina Morosini
    iname: thomasina morosini
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26240.html
receivers:
  - id: 26243
    name: Chapter of St. Peter of Pozsega
    iname: chapter of st. peter of pozsega
    type: people
    url: /people/26243.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Lady Thomasina by the grace of God mother of lord Andrew, illustrious king of Hungary, duchess of all Slavonia and governor of the parts across the Danube up to the sea, to the faithfuls in the chapter of St. Peter of Pozsega greetings and grace.&nbsp; Rozboyd and Petrus, son(s) of count/<i>ispán</i> Lambert tell us that master Demetrius count of Valkó had plundered a certain possession of theirs, Tolmány of all its goods on the Sunday after the feast of all saints, destroying it without cause. For which we ask, commanding your loyalty, that with our man Lawrence you send your reliable man who will know about the matter and may inquire the truth, summoning also that master Demetrius against the said sons of Lampert [to our presence] and after this, as the truth will be know about these things to you, you will write us faithfully the manner of the summons and the names and assigned terms of those summoned.&nbsp; Dated in Pozsega on the octave of all saints.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Domina Th[omasina] dei gracia mater domini Andree illustris regis Vngarie, ducissa tocius Sclauonie et gubernatrix parcium Citradanubialium usque marittima, fidelibus capitulo beati Petri de Posogha salutem et graciam.&nbsp; Dicunt nobis Rozboyd et Petrus filius comitis Lamperti, quod magister Demetrius comes de Wolkou quandam possessionem ipsorum Tulman omnibus bonis suis dominica proxima post festum omnium sanctorum indebite destruendo spoliasset.&nbsp; Quapropter fidelitatem vestram mandantes requirimus, quatenus cum Laurencio homine nostro vestrum hominem mittatis fidedignum, qui de premissis sciat et inquirat veritatem; citando nichilominus ipsum magistrum Demetrium contra predictos filios Lamperti ad nostram presenciam, et post hec, sicut super hiis uobis ueritas constiterit, et modum citacionis ac nomina citatorum et terminum assignatum nobis fideliter rescribatis.&nbsp; Datum in Posogha, in octauis omnium sanctorum.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The duchess orders a chapter of Pozsega to investigate along with her representative the complaint made by the sons of <i>ispán </i>Lambert, Rozboyd and Peter, that master Demetrius <i>ispán </i>of Valkó&nbsp; had ravaged their estate called Tolmány (Tulman) and report their findings to her.&nbsp;&nbsp;Zsoldos, 175, disputes in some detail the dating of 1300 in the edition, putting it in 1296.&nbsp; &nbsp;The same text appears in <i>Árpádkori új okmánytár:&nbsp; Codex diplomaticus Arpadianus continuatus</i>, vols. I-XII, G. Wenzel ed. (Pest-Budapest: 1860-74), 10.375, #248.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Codex diplomaticus regni Croatiae, Dalmatiae et Slavoniae</i>, ed. T. Smiciklas (Zagreb, 1904-34), 7.405, #360.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1296, November 8