---
letter_id: "26285"
title: "A confirmation"
ititle: "a confirmation"
ltr_date: "1275"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2020-09-02"
modified: "2020-09-02"
url: "/letter/26285.html"
senders:
  - id: 26203
    name: Elizabeth of the Cumans
    iname: elizabeth of the cumans
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Elizabeth by the grace of God queen of Hungary to all the faithful of Christ who will look at the present page, greetings in the eternal lord.&nbsp; We wish to bring to the notice of all by the contents of the presents:&nbsp; that coming into our presence our settlers of Komár showed us the charter on their freedom from lord Béla illustrious king of Hungary of bright memory… our father-in-law, asking us urgently that we deign to hold that fixed and acceptable and to confirm it with our charter, whose content is thus [reference to the document of Béla IV dated 1263, under number 274].&nbsp; They also showed us two public (patent) letters under the great seal and under the seal of the ring of that lord king&nbsp; over the fact of the division of land of those and the settlers of Golombuk containing this:&nbsp; [See letters of Béla under number 268]&nbsp; And we, inclined to their just petitions, have confirmed that charter as well as those public/patent having them copied word for word in our charter.&nbsp; Dated by the hand of master Gregory, loyal chancellor of our court in the year of the lord 1275.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Elisabeth Dei gratia Regina Hungariae omnibus Christi fidelibus praesentem paginam inspecturis, salutem in domino sempiternam.&nbsp; Ad vniuersitatis vestrae notitiam tenore praesentium volumus peruenire:&nbsp; quod accedentes ad nostram praesentiam hospites nostri de Kamar exhibuerunt nobis super sua libertate Priuilegium clarae memoriae Domini Belae Inclyti Regis Hungariae … soceri nostri petentes cum instantia, vt ipsum ratum et gratum habere, et nostro dignaremur priuilegio confirmare, cuius tenor talis est [sequitur Diploma Belae IV. d.a. 1263 sub Nro. CCLXXIV. recensitum]&nbsp; --- Exhibuerunt etiam duas patentes litteras sub magno sigillo et sub sigillo annuli eiusdem Domini Regis super facto diuisionis terrae ipsorum et hospitum de Golombuk hunc tenorem continentes:&nbsp; [Videantur litterae Belae sub Nro. CCLXVIII. occurrentes].&nbsp; --- Nos itaque iustis petitionibus ipsorum inclinatae, tam ipsum priuilegium, quam etiam ipsas patentes de verbo ad verbum rescribi faciendo nostro priuilegio duximus confirmandas.&nbsp; Datum per manus Magistri Gregorii aulae nostrae fidelis ----- Cancellarii An. Domini MCCLXXV.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen confirms the privilege of Béla IV granted to setters of Komár, and one on the&nbsp; division of the lands of Komár and Golombuk.&nbsp; She apparently included the texts of the privileges, but the edition of her document does not include them.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Codex Diplomaticus Hungariae ecclesiasticus ac civilis</i>, ed. G. Fejér (Budae, Regiae Vniversitatis Vngariae, 1829—44), 7.2.41-42, #328.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1275