---
letter_id: "26295"
title: "A letter of confirmation"
ititle: "a letter of confirmation"
ltr_date: "1291"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2020-10-03"
modified: "2020-10-03"
url: "/letter/26295.html"
senders:
  - id: 26288
    name: Fenenna of Kuyavia
    iname: fenenna of kuyavia
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Fenenna by the grace of God queen of Hungary to all the faithful of Christ, present and future,&nbsp; who will look at the present writing, eternal greetings (salvation) in the lord.&nbsp; We wish to bring to the notice of all by the contents of these that master Andronicus provost and the chapter of the church of Veszprém coming into&nbsp; our presence showed us the charters of lady Elisabeth [Isabella], queen, consort of lord Ladislaus king of Hungary of happy memory, on the donation or grant of the lands of our butlers (pincernarum seu bochariorum) of the territory in the great town of Berény, seeking with urgency that we deign to confirm that we have that donation or grant fixed by our charter/privilege.&nbsp; Of which charter this is the content:[Isabella 1280, archive # 185 and 1289, #228].&nbsp; We therefore giving favorable consent to the petitions of the provost and the chapter, and also out of devotion/dedication to St. Michael the archangel which we have at the church of Veszprém, so that we are held to this by the office of our rule, holding that donation fixed and agreeable, we have had inserted the said charters from the lady queen word for word in the presents and fortified by the support of the presents leaving the named land of our butlers lying in that land of Berény, with the consent of the archbishops, bishops and all the barons of our reign to that church of Veszprém, namely for the use and property of that chapter, to be possessed perpetually and irrevocably.&nbsp; In memory and perpetual stability of which thing we have granted the present letters strengthened by the protection of our double seal.&nbsp; Dated by the hand of the venerable father Andrew, by grace of God bishop of Eger, our faithful chancellor of our court in the 1291st year of the Lord.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Fenenna Dei gratia regina Hungarie universis Christi fidelibus tam presentibus, quam futuris presens scriptum inspecturis salutem in domino sempiternam. Ad universorum notitiam harum serie volumus pervenire, quod magister Andronicus prepositus et capitulum Wesprimiensis ecclesie ad nostram accedentes presentiam exhibuerunt nobis privilegia domine Elysabeth regine consortis domini Ladizlai felicis recordationis regis Hungarie super donatione seu collatione terre pincernarum seu bochariorum nostrorum de territorio magne ville Beren petentes cum instantia, ut ipsam donationem seu collationem ratam habere et nostro dignaremur privilegio confirmare. Quorum quidem privilegiorum tenor talis est: (Következik Izabella királyné 1280. évi oklevele, lásd 185. sz. és Izabella királyné 1289. évi oklevele, lásd 228. sz.) Nos igitur petitionibus ipsorum prepositi et capituli favorabilem assensum adhibentes tum etiam ob devotionem Beati Mychaelis archangeli, quam ad ipsam Wesprimiensem ecclesiam habemus, ut ex officio nostri regiminis ad hoc tenemur, ipsam donationem ratam habentes et acceptam predicta privilegia domine regine de verbo ad verbum presentibus inseri fecimus et presentium patrocinio communiri memoratam terram pincernarum de territorio magne ville Beren simul cum terra curriferorum, bochariorum nostrorum in eadem terra Beren existenti ex consensu archiepiscoporum, episcoporum et omnium baronum regni nostri eidem ecclesie Wesprimiensi, scilicet ad usum et proprietatem capituli ipsius perpetuo et irrevocabiliter possidendam relinquentes. In cuius rei memoriam firmitatemque perpetuam presentes concessimus litteras dupplicis sigilli nostri munimine roboratas. Datum per manus venerabilis patris Andree Dei gratia episcopi Agriensis, aule nostre cancellarii fidelis nostri anno Domini Mo CCo nonagesimo primo.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen confirms charters&nbsp; of her predecessor, Isabella, granting land of her butlers to the church of Veszprém (cf. Zsoldos, <i>The Arpads</i>, 79).&nbsp; The charters which she quoted but are not included in this edition are <i>Árpádkori íj okmánytar</i>, AUO 4.221-22 (<i>Epistolae</i> 26194.html) and AUO 4.343 (<i>Ep.</i> 26197.html).&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><span><em>Az Árpád-házi hercegek, hercegnök és a királnék okleveleinek kritikai jegyzéke,</em>&nbsp;</span><em>Regesta ducum, ducissarum stirpis Arpadiana</em><span>, ed. A. Zsoldos (Budapestini, 2008). 162-63, #259.</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1291