---
letter_id: "26294"
title: "A letter of confirmation"
ititle: "a letter of confirmation"
ltr_date: "1291"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2020-10-03"
modified: "2020-10-03"
url: "/letter/26294.html"
senders:
  - id: 26288
    name: Fenenna of Kuyavia
    iname: fenenna of kuyavia
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Fennena, by the grace of God queen of Hungary to all the faithful of Christ who will look at the present page greetings in the author of salvation.&nbsp; We wish to bring to the notice of all by the contents of these,&nbsp; that the prudent man master Paul our faithful cantor of the church of Buda coming into our presence, showed us the charter of the great lady Elisabeth [Isabella] formerly queen of Hungary, widow namely of lord Ladislaus former illustrious king of Hungary on the granting of the land Jwtas, asking with urgency that we deign to confirm by our charter that we hold that fixed, agreeable and acceptable.&nbsp; Of which the content is this:&nbsp; [Isabelle 1290, archive 241].&nbsp; And so we extending full faith to the truth of the acts had that charter inserted in the presents word for word, not corrupted in any part, in eternal memory of the thing to be confirmed by the protection of the present writing. In memory and fuller notice&nbsp; of which thing we have granted the present letters strengthened by the protection of our double seal.&nbsp; Dated by that hand of the venerable father lord Andrew by the grace of God our faithful bishop of Eger in the 1291st year of the Lord.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Fenenna Dei gratia regina Hungarie universis Christi fidelibus presentem paginam intuentibus salutem in auctore salutis. Ad universorum notitiam tenore presentium volumus pervenire, quod vir discretus magister Paulus cantor ecclesie Budensis fidelis noster ad nostram accedens presentiam exhibuit nobis privilegium magnifice domine Elysabeth quondam regine Hungarie relicte videlicet domini Ladislai olim illustris regis Hungarie super terre Jwtas confectum, petens cum instantia, ut ipsum ratum, gratum et acceptum habere ac nostro dignaremur privilegio confirmare. Cuius tenor talis est: (Következik Izabella királyné 1290. évi oklevele, lásd 241. sz.) Nos itaque veritati gestorum fidem plenam adhibentes ipsum privilegium de verbo ad verbum presentibus insertum in nulla sui parte viciatum in eternam rei memoriam presentis scripti patrocinio duximus confirmandum. [I]n cuius rei memoriam notitiamque pleniorem presentes concessimus litteras duplicis sigilli nostri munimine roboratas. Datum per manus venerabilis patris domini Andree Dei gratia episcopi Agriensis fidelis nostri anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo nonagesimo primo.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen confirms a charter of Isabella granting land&nbsp; to a cantor in the church of Buda.&nbsp; She apparently included the previous charter which does not appear in this edition, but assuming that Jwtas is Jutas, the charter may be &nbsp;<i>Codex Diplomaticus Hungariae ecclesiasticus ac civilis</i>, ed. G. Fejér (Budae, 1829-44), 7.2.127-29 (<i>Epistolae</i>, 26287.html). &nbsp;Zsoldos, <i>The Arpads,</i> &nbsp;68, notes Paul’s loyalty to Isabella for which the king may have deprived him of lands.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Az Árpád-házi hercegek, hercegnök és a királnék okleveleinek kritikai jegyzéke, <em>Regesta ducum, ducissarum stirpis Arpadiana</em>, ed. A. Zsoldos (Budapestini, 2008),&nbsp;162, #258.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1291