---
letter_id: "26301"
title: "A confirmation of a donation"
ititle: "a confirmation of a donation"
ltr_date: "1269"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2020-10-13"
modified: "2020-10-13"
url: "/letter/26301.html"
senders:
  - id: 26208
    name: Maria Laskarina
    iname: maria laskarina
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Maria by the grace of God queen of Hungary to all the faithful of Christ present and future who will look at the present writing greetings in the Lord.&nbsp; We wish to bring to the notice of all by the contents of these that count Nicholas, son of count/<i>ispán</i> our loyal Jule of Suclous, coming into our presence showed us the charter of Béla duke of all Slavonia, our dearest son, about the gift made of the land Bezen, asking us most assiduously that we would deign to confirm said charter by our charter.&nbsp; The content of which charter is this:&nbsp; (Duke Béla, 1269, charter 36).&nbsp; We therefore acquiescing to the entreaties of that Nicholas, we had the privilege of our dearest son confirmed by the presents, holding it valid and firm.&nbsp; In memory and perpetual stability of which thing we have bestowed the presents strengthened by the protection of our double seal.&nbsp; Dated by the hand of master Stephen, vicechancellor of our court in the 1267th year of the Lord.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p><strong></strong></p><p>Maria Dei gratia regina Hungarie omnibus Christi fidelibus tam presentibus, quam futuris presentem paginam inspecturis salutem in Domino. Ad universorum notitiam harum serie volumus pervenire, quod Nycolaus comes filius Jule de Suclous, noster fidelis ad nostram accedens presentiam exibuit nobis privilegium Bele ducis totius Sclavonie, nostri filii karissimi super donatione confectum terre Bezen petens a nobis attentissime, ut dictum privilegium nostro dignaremur confirmare privilegio. Cuius quidem privilegii tenor talis est: (Következik Béla herceg 1269. évi privilégiuma, lásd 36. sz.) Nos igitur supplicationibus eiusdem Nycolai condesscendentes iddem [!] privilegium filii nostri karissimi ratum habentes et firmum presentibus duximus confirmandum. In cuius rei memoriam et perpetuam firmitatem presentes contulimus dupplicis sigilli nostri munimine roboratas. Datum per manus magistri Stephani vicecancellarii aule nostre anno Domini Mo CCo LXo VIIo.</p><p>&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen confirms a donation by her son.&nbsp; The charter is dated 1267, but the editors correct the date to 1269.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>RD <span>Az Árpád-házi hercegek, hercegnök és a királnék okleveleinek kritikai jegyzéke, Regesta ducum, ducissarum stirpis Arpadiana necnon reginarum Hungariae critico-diplomatica, E. Szentpétery, A. Zsoldos (Budapest, 2008), 59, #75.</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1269