---
letter_id: "26309"
title: "A return of favor"
ititle: "a return of favor"
ltr_date: "1273, May 9"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2020-11-07"
modified: "2020-11-07"
url: "/letter/26309.html"
senders:
  - id: 26203
    name: Elizabeth of the Cumans
    iname: elizabeth of the cumans
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>We Elizabeth by the grace of God queen of Hungary make known to all to whom it reaches by the content of the presents that we decided to receive into our former grace Endres of Meney warrior of our faithful master Giles, who with that master Giles transferred to the castle/<i>ispánate</i> of Pozsega with the good will of the lord king L[adislaus] our dearest son and with ours and with the counsel of all our barons and nobles of the kingdom, all his possessions namely the land Kaplan with its appurtenances and others which he held and possessed peacefully at the time of lord king St[ephen] our dearest father-in-law of happy memory through him without the opposition and diminution of anyone to hinder the restoration.&nbsp; Dated in Wsod on the day after the quinzaine of St. George, in the 1273rd year.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Nos E. [= Elizabeth] Dei gratia regina Hungarie significamus universis, quibus expedit presentium per tenorem, quod Endrem de Meney militem magistri Egidii fidelis nostri, qui cum eodem magistro Egidio in castrum Posoniense se transtulerat de beneplacito domini regis L. [= Ladizlai] karissimi fili [!] nostri et nostro consilioque omnium baronum nostrorum et regni nobilium in nostram pristinam gratiam duximus recipiendum, omnes possessiones suas, videlicet terram Kaplan cum suis pertinentiis et alias, quas tempore domini regis St. [= Stephani] karissimi consortis nostri felicis recordationis habitas et possessas pacifice per eundem contradictione et diminutione quibuslibet non obstantibus eidem restituendo. Datum in Wsod, in crastino quindenarum Sancti Georgii, anno Domini Mo CCo LXXo tertio.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen accepts back into her favor someone who had been awarded his land by king Stephen and now transfers to Pozega.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Az Árpád-házi hercegek, hercegnök és a királnék okleveleinek kritikai jegyzéke, Regesta ducum, ducissarum stirpis Arpadiana</i>, ed. E. Szentpétery, A. Zsoldos (Budapest 2008), 70, #100.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1273, May 9