---
letter_id: "26315"
title: "A letter of confirmation"
ititle: "a letter of confirmation"
ltr_date: "1280"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2020-11-10"
modified: "2020-11-10"
url: "/letter/26315.html"
senders:
  - id: 26203
    name: Elizabeth of the Cumans
    iname: elizabeth of the cumans
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26203.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>E[lizabeth] by the grace of God senior queen of Hungary, duchess of Macsó and Bosnia to all the faithful of Christ who will look at the present writing, greetings in the savior of all.&nbsp; We wish to bring to [the notice] of all present and future by the content of these that John, son of count Geubelin of Leuche coming into our presence showed us the charter of the illustrious lord king Béla our father-in-law of happy memory asking that we deign to ratify that charter and having ratified confirm it by our charter.&nbsp; The content of which is:&nbsp; [ref. to Béla, 1263, RA 1377].&nbsp; We therefore favorably inclined to the just and worthy requests of that John determined to confirm by the authority of the present the charter of our said father-in-law which was not cancelled, not erased, nor corrupted in any way by having it inserted word for word in the present, strengthened by the protection of our double seal.&nbsp; Dated by the hand of the venerable and prudent man master Luke provost of the church of Esztergom, our faithful chancellor of our court in the 1280th year from the incarnation of the Lord.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>[E]lisabeth Dei gratia maior regina Hungarie, ducissa de Macho et de Bozna omnibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptum inspecturis salutem in omnium salvatore. Ad universorum presentium futurorumque harum serie volumus pervenire, quod Johannes filius comitis Geubulini de Leuche ad nostram accedens presentiam exhibuit nobis privilegium domini Bele regis illustris, soceri nostri felicis recordationis petens, ut ipsum privilegium ratificare et ratificatum nostro dignaremur privilegio confirmare. Cuius tenor talis est: (Következik IV. Béla 1263. évi privilégiuma, lásd RA 1377. sz.) Nos igitur petitionibus ipsius Johannis iustis et condignis favorabiliter inclinate, privilegium dicti soceri nostri non cancellatum, non abrasum, nec in aliqua sui parte viciatum de verbo ad verbum presentibus inseri facientes auctoritate presentium duximus confirmandum duplicis sigilli nostri munimine roborando. Datum per manus venerabilis et discreti viri magistri Luce Strigoniensis ecclesie prepositi, aule nostre cancellarii fidelis nostri anno ab incarnatione Domini Mo CCo octuagesimo.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen ratifies and confirms a charter of her father-in-law, king Béla.&nbsp; She includes his charter in hers, but the text is not included in the edition.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i>Az Árpád-házi hercegek, hercegnök és a királnék okleveleinek kritikai jegyzéke, Regesta ducum, ducissarum stirpis Arpadiana</i>, ed. E. Szentpétery, A. Zsoldos (Budapest 2008), 89, #130.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1280