---
letter_id: "26316"
title: "A letter of confirmation"
ititle: "a letter of confirmation"
ltr_date: "1280"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2020-11-10"
modified: "2020-11-10"
url: "/letter/26316.html"
senders:
  - id: 26203
    name: Elizabeth of the Cumans
    iname: elizabeth of the cumans
    type: woman
    url: /woman/26203.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>E[lizabeth] by the grace of God senior queen of Hungary, duchess of Macsó and Bosnia to all the faithful of Christ who will look at the present writing, greetings in the savior of all.&nbsp; We wish to make manifest to all present and future by the notice of the presents that Dominic and his brother Thomas, also Kazimir and Ladislaus, sons of that Dominic of Szepes coming into our presence showed us the charter of lord Ladislaus, illustrious king of Hungary our dearest son, which was composed about the confirmation of the conferring of a certain land of Szepes asking, humbly entreating, that we deign to hold that conferring valid and also confirm that charter by our charter.&nbsp; The content of which is [ref. to RA 2.2/3, 124, Ladislaus 1275].&nbsp; So we, favorably inclined to the just prayers of said Dominic, Thomas, Kazimir and Ladislaus, held that conferring that was made to them valid and acceptable, and had the charter of that lord king Ladislaus which was not cancelled, not erased, inserted into the presents strengthened by the protection of our double seal.&nbsp; Wishing that those&nbsp;Dominic, Thomas, Kazimir and Ladislaus and their heirs and successors of their heirs might hold and have said land perpetually and peacefully with the freedoms granted to them from our conferring because of the merits of their loyalties.&nbsp; Dated by the hand of the venerable and prudent man master Luke, provost of the holy church of Esztergom, our faithful chancellor of our court in the 1280th year of the Lord.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Elizabeth Dei gratia maior regina Hungarie ducissa de Machov et de Bozna omnibus Christi fidelibus praesens scriptum inspecturis salutem in omnium salvatore. Universorum presentium futurorumque notitia tenore presentium fieri volumus manifestum, quod Dominicus et Thomas frater eius, necnon Kazmirius et Ladislaus filii ipsius Dominici de Scepws ad nostram accedentes presentiam exhibuerunt nobis privilegium domini Ladislai illustris regis Hungarie filii nostri charissimi super confirmatione collationis cuiusdam terrae de Scepws confectum humiliter supplicando postulantes, ut ipsam collationem ratam habere et idem privilegium nostro etiam dignaremur privilegio confirmare. Cuius tenor talis est: (Következik IV. László király 1275. máj. 21-i oklevele, RA II/2–3. 124.) Nos itaque iustis praefatorum Dominici, Thomae, Kazmirii et Ladislai praecibus favorabiliter inclinati, collationem eis factam ratam habuimus et acceptam et privilegium ipsius domini regis Ladislai non cancellatum, non abrasum praesentibus inseri fecimus dupplicis sigilli nostri munimine roborando. Volentes, quod iidem Dominicus, Thomas, Kazmirius et Ladislaus ac eorum haeredes haeredumque suorum successores dictam terram cum libertatibus eis concessis ex nostra etiam collatione propter merita fidelitatum suorum perpetuo et pacifice tenere valeant et habere. Datum per manus venerabilis et discreti viri magistri Lucae sanctae Strigoniensis ecclesiae praepositi, aulae nostrae cancellarii fidelis nostri anno Domini M CCsimo LXXXsimo .</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen validates and confirms a charter of her son, king Ladislaus.&nbsp; She includes his charter in hers, but the text is not included in the edition.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><i><span>Az Árpád-házi hercegek, hercegnök és a királnék okleveleinek kritikai jegyzéke, Regesta ducum, ducissarum stirpis Arpadiana</span></i><span>, ed. E. Szentpétery, A. Zsoldos (Budapest 2008), 90, #131.</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1280