---
letter_id: "26399"
title: "A poem from Hildebert"
ititle: "a poem from hildebert"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2021-04-22"
modified: "2021-04-22"
url: "/letter/26399.html"
senders:
  - id: 21400
    name: Hildebert, bishop of Lavardin
    iname: hildebert, bishop of lavardin
    type: people
    url: /people/21400.html
receivers:
  - id: 27
    name: Matilda of England, empress
    iname: matilda of england, empress
    type: woman
    url: /woman/27.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p><span>Born to august parents, Matilda more august(1) still,</span><br><span>in whatever praises you evoke from skilled mouths,</span><br><span>but in vain, for no one can render praise to you,</span><br><span>which [your] birth and customs and good form/beauty demand.</span><br><span>a [one] tongue may utter you, but you alone provide</span><br><span>the matter of highest praise to all tongues.(2)</span><br><span>in your face is a queen, redolent of juniper,(3)</span><br><span>serious [not frivolous] in gait, a beauty not fashioned by art.</span><br><span>learning did not lend holy customs, a virgin modesty,</span><br><span>each good flowed from your ancestors.</span><br><span>you have it all from your mother who, closed in the tomb,</span><br><span>illumines the English kingdom with her merits.</span><br><span>and lest the glory of the womanly sex should decline she gave birth to you, completely reborn in your birth.</span><br><span>not born only once, the parent lies in the urn, rules in the court,</span><br><span>here beside men, above, beside God.</span><br><span>beside God, she sees how all that is left is nothing,</span><br><span>how her daughter holding the scepter is poor.</span><br><span>herself secure, I think she watches over you,</span><br><span>and solicits her maker thus:</span><br><span>“I have not yet been admitted fully to the heavenly see,</span><br><span>great God, I enjoy only semi-blessed rest.</span><br><span>a part lies in the tomb, a part governs the English kingdom,</span><br><span>the court, the tomb, and heaven hold me divided.</span><br><span>help the one in the court: reform the one in the tomb:</span><br><span>hear the one in heaven, and be a crown to all three.”</span></p><div class="region region-page-top"><div class="navbar-tray overlay-displace-top active navbar-tray-horizontal" data-navbar-tray="navbar-tray--2" data-offset-top=""><div class="navbar-lining clearfix"><div class="navbar-toggle-orientation"><div class="navbar-lining"></div></div></div></div></div><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p><span>Augustis patribus augustior orta Mathildis,</span><br><span>quaslibet in laudes ora diserta vocas --</span><br><span>sed frustra, quia nemo tibi preconia solvet,</span><br><span>que genus, et mores, et bona forma petit.</span><br><span>una loqui te lingua potest, que laudis opime</span><br><span>materiam linguis omnibus una paras.</span><br><span>in vultu regina tuo est, redoletque Sabinam</span><br><span>non levis incessus, nec datus arte decor.</span><br><span>non mores doctrina sacros, non virgo pudorem</span><br><span>prestitit — ex proavis fluxit utrumque bonum.</span><br><span>cuncta tue genetricis habes, que clausa sepulchro,</span><br><span>illustrat meritis Anglica regna suis.</span><br><span>neve simul caderet muliebris gloria sexus</span><br><span>te peperit, partu tota renata tuo.</span><br><span>non semel orta parens iacet urna, regnat in aula,</span><br><span>hic homini, sursum collaterata Deo.</span><br><span>collaterata Deo, quam sit nihil omne relictum</span><br><span>cernit, quam sit inops filia sceptra tenens.</span><br><span>hanc sibi securam de te curare, suumque</span><br><span>taliter Auctorem sollicitare reor:</span><br><span>“nondum me totam celesti sede recepi,</span><br><span>magne Deus, requie semibeata fruor.</span><br><span>pars iacet in tumulo, pars Anglica regna gubernat,</span><br><span>divisamque tenent aula, sepulchra, polus.</span><br><span>quam tenet aula iuva; quam clausa sepulchra reforma:</span><br><span>quam polus exaudi, sisque corona tribus.”</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p><span>The poem praises Matilda for her birth, her customs, her beauty, her learning, and her virtues, calling her a fitting successor to her deceased mother.</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p><span>1)Augustior is presumably a pun on the daughter’s imperial status, which her parents did not have: they were venerable but not imperial.</span><br><span>(2)Carmela Franklin, who helped me with this translation, wondered if “una lingua” could refer to Matilda’s mother, the only one who can properly praise her daughter.</span><br><span>(3)Could Sabinam be a reference to Saba, the queen of Sheba who tested Solomon in wisdom?</span><br><span>(4)Scott and others assume the addressee of this poem is queen Matilda, the mother of the empress, but Chibnall, <em>The Empress Matilda</em>, 47 fn14, assigns it to the empress, based on the arguments of T. Latzke, “Die Fürstinnenpreis,” Mittellateinisches Jahrbuch 14 (1979), 50-53.</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><span><em>Hildeberti Carmina Minora</em>, ed. A.B. Scott (Leipzig: Teubner, 1969), #35(4); also PL190, c.1408-09</span></p>