---
letter_id: "26408"
title: "Confirmation of a grant"
ititle: "confirmation of a grant"
ltr_date: "1254, August 3 "
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2021-05-27"
modified: "2021-05-27"
url: "/letter/26408.html"
senders:
  - id: 21422
    name: Innocent IV, pope
    iname: innocent iv, pope
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 26155
    name: Salomea of Little Poland
    iname: salomea of little poland
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Innocent [the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to the noblewoman] Sister Salomea, of&nbsp;the Order of Saint Damian, born of the late L[eszek], duke of Kraków and Sandomierz&nbsp;[greetings and apostolic benediction]. The sincerity of your devotion requires that we should&nbsp;do what favour we worthily can: hence it is that, having inclined to your requests, we grant to&nbsp;you by the authority of these present letters, that if our beloved son, your brother, the&nbsp;nobleman, B[olesław], Duke of Kraków and Sandomierz, should happen to die without issue,&nbsp;and to bequeath to you some manors pertaining to his own right, you may lawfully receive&nbsp;and retain [them], while you still live, for your monastery and its work, intending to return&nbsp;them after your death to the legitimate successors of the same duke.&nbsp;&nbsp;Therefore no one at all may infringe this page of our grant, or with reckless daring to&nbsp;contradict it. If anyone [should do so, let him be anathema, etc.].</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Innocentius [episcopus seruus seruorum Dej. Nobili mulieri] sorori Salomee, ordinis s.&nbsp;Damiani, nate quondam L. Cracouie ac Sandomirie ducis, [salutem et apostolicam&nbsp;benedictionem]. Tue deuotionis sinceritas exigit, ut tibi, quam digne possimus, gratiam&nbsp;faciamus. Hinc est, quod nos tuis supplicationibus inclinati, auctoritate tibi presentium&nbsp;indulgemus, vt si dilectum filium nobilem virum B. ducem Cracouie et Sandomirie,&nbsp;germanum tuum, contingat decedere sine prole tibique relinquere villas aliquas, ad se iure&nbsp;spectantes, licite possis ad tuum et monasterij opus recipere, ac etiam dum vixeris, retinere,&nbsp;ad successores legitimos ducis eiusdem post tuum obitum redituras. Datum Anagnie tertio&nbsp;nonas Augusti, [pontificatus nostri] anno XII.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p><span>Pope Innocent writes to Salomea of Little Poland, confirming the grant of estates to her monastery should her brother die without issue.&nbsp; The text and translation was provided by Talia Zajac,&nbsp;&nbsp;<span>Leverhulme Early Career Fellow <span>at the John Rylands Research Institute and Library</span>.</span></span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Franciszek Piekosiński, ed. <em>Kodeks dyplomatyczny Małopolski</em>, vol. 2: 1153-1333, (Kraków:&nbsp;&nbsp;Akad. Umiejętności, 1886), no. 444, p. 98.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1254, August 3 