---
letter_id: "26410"
title: "Confirmation of an exchange"
ititle: "confirmation of an exchange"
ltr_date: "1243, March 20"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2021-05-27"
modified: "2021-12-03"
url: "/letter/26410.html"
senders:
  - id: 26342
    name: Boleslaw V, duke of Sandomierz
    iname: boleslaw v, duke of sandomierz
    type: people
  - id: 26141
    name: Gremislava of Lutsk
    iname: gremislava of lutsk
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>In the name of the Holy and Individual Trinity, amen. Therefore, let every church rejoice&nbsp;strengthened in her own right by boundaries of peace. We Bolesław, son of Leszek by divine&nbsp;providence duke of Sandomierz together with our mother, lady Gremislava, with the&nbsp;agreement of the chapter of the church of Sandomierz and by the will of the brothers of the&nbsp;monastery of Wąchock make such an exchange between themselves, namely: that the church&nbsp;of Sandomierz should have part of the estate of Nicholas / Mikołaj son of Hugo, which lies&nbsp;next to the same city, while the monastery of Wąchock for its part should receive according&nbsp;to hereditary right possession of a certain portion which the church of Sandomierz used to&nbsp;have in Ostrów next to the rock.&nbsp;<br>The present persons whose names are here both as actors [and] as witnesses were in&nbsp;attendance at this exchange: Martin, abbot of the aforementioned monastery, Matthew the&nbsp;deacon, Jaskor the provost of the church of Sandomierz, Salomon the scholar, Peter the&nbsp;cantor, canons John [and] Florian, Benedict the sub-chamberlain, Hartmann the doctor, the&nbsp;vicars Bartholomew, Matthew, Gabriel, John, Baldwin.&nbsp;<br>And on the same day the said Nicholas / Mikołaj testified publicly that he accepted six marks&nbsp;of pure silver from the aforementioned abbot with the monastery of Wąchock and with the&nbsp;same witnesses for his donation and sale.&nbsp;<br>Done in the year of the Lord 1243. These things were done in Sandomierz on the vigil of [the&nbsp;feast] of Blessed Benedict the Abbot [20 March with the feast day on 21 March].</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>In nomine sanctae et indiuidue trinitatis amen. Igitur suo iure queque gaudeat ecclesia pacis&nbsp;limitibus communita. Nos boleslaus filius lestconis diuina prouidentia dux&nbsp;Sudomiriensis cum matre nostra domina Grimislaua consensu capituli Sudomiriensis&nbsp;ecclesie et de uoluntate fratrum claustri de Wanchozk talem inter eos fecimus&nbsp;permutacionem uidelicet quod ecclesia Sudomiriensis partem uille Nicholai filii&nbsp;Ugonis haberet que iacet iuxta ipsam ciuitatem clastrum uero de wanchosk pro ipsa&nbsp;parte quandam porcionem quam sudomiriensis ecclesia in Ostrou habebat iuxta&nbsp;lapidem iure hereditario&nbsp; possidendam susciperet. Huius permutacionis presentes&nbsp;affuerunt quorum ista sunt nomina tam actores quam testes. Martinus abbas claustri&nbsp;prefatis, Matheus decanuus, Iascocel prepositus Suodmiriensis ecclesie, Salomon&nbsp;scholasticus, Petrus cantor, Iohannes, Florianus canonici, Benedictus&nbsp; subcancelarius,&nbsp;Hartmannus fisicus, Bartholomeus, Matheus, Gabrihel, Iohannes, Baldiunus vicarii.&nbsp;Et ipso die dictus Nicholaus prostestatus est claustro de Wanchozk suam donacionem&nbsp;et vendicionem et sub eisdem testibus a prefato abbate sex marcas puri argenti&nbsp;accepit. Actum Anno Domini MCCXLIII, Facta sunt ista in sudomiria in vigilia beati&nbsp;Benedicti abbatis.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Co-issuer with son Bolesław V. Together with her son, Gremislava confirms exchange of&nbsp;land between Cistercians of Wąchock, and the collegiate church of Sandomierz (The&nbsp;Cistercian monastery in Wąchock gave part of the village of Mikołaj, son of Hugo, to&nbsp;the Sandomierz collegiate church, and in return received part of the village of&nbsp;Ostrów.)&nbsp;<br>The text and translation were provided by Talia Zajac,&nbsp;&nbsp;<span>Leverhulme Early Career Fellow&nbsp;<span>at the John Rylands Research Institute and Library.</span></span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>First edition in Zygmunt Wdowiszewski, “Nieznane dyplomy średniowieczne do dziejów&nbsp;opactwa Cystersów w Wąchocku.” <em>Archeion: Czasopismo naukowe poświecone&nbsp;sprawom archiwalnym</em>, 16 (1938-1939): 39-46 at 43-44. Open access:&nbsp;https://www.archiwa.gov.pl/pl/578-archeion [last access 25 May 2026].&nbsp;<br>Revised edition: Stanisław Kuraś and and Irena Sułkowska-Kuraś, eds., <em>Zbiór dokumentów&nbsp;małopolskich.</em> Część 4: Dokumenty z lat 1211-1400 (Wrocław/Warszawa/Kraków:&nbsp;Zakład Narodowy Imienia Ossolińskich/Wydawnictwo Polskiej Akademii Nauk,&nbsp;1969), no. 875, pp. 9-10.&nbsp;<br>NB: The revised edition inexplicably abbreviates ‘sanctae’, which is expanded in the charter,&nbsp;Wdowiszewski, “Nieznane dyplomy”, p. 44.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1243, March 20