---
letter_id: "23737"
title: "A letter from Hrotsvit, nun of Gandersheim ()"
ititle: "a letter from hrotsvit, nun of gandersheim ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-29"
url: "/letter/27.html"
senders:
  - id: 7
    name: Hrotsvit, nun of Gandersheim
    iname: hrotsvit, nun of gandersheim
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21325
    name: emperor Otto II
    iname: emperor otto ii
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Otto, brilliant jewel of the Roman realm,
resplendent flower of the imperial venerable Otto,
for whom the king of the high throne [God] and his son
destined an empire mighty at the summit.
Do not scorn the lowly text of a lowly nun
which, if you deign to remember, you recently ordered
to be presented to your bright eyes.
And when you see that it is soiled with frequent blemishes,
be the more inclined to swift mercy
in that I am showing it at your order.
If I were not urged by fear of your command,
I would in no way have the confidence
to let you examine its crudeness,
to dare to offer this little book.
Joined by God's gift with your father in his court,
and prompt to obey paternal counsels,
you hold in harmony equal glory of the wide empire,
carrying the royal scepter in your tender right hand.
But since I am mindful that you are compared
to Solomon, son of the famous king David,
who in his father's presence and at his holy order,
received the paternal kingdom with desired peace,
by his example I hope that you will be content.
When he ruled he resided in a proud citadel,
wisely establishing the decrees of holy laws
and penetrating the secrets of things in his deep spirit,
sometimes relaxing his mind with little questions,
but he took the trouble in the conflict of two women
to resolve it by the swift determination of right judgment,
ordering the child to be restored to the true mother.
This then I beg you, our Solomon, that
though you may hold the care of a demanding empire,
you deign nonetheless to enjoy
this recent work from your nun for entertainment,
that all crudeness of speech in the badly composed words
may fall away in the treatment of the imperial name,
and marked by your venerable title,
they may be protected from the breath of deserved scorn.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Oddo, Romani praefulgens gemmula regni,
Oddonis flos augusti splendens venerandi,
Cui sex altithronus perpes quoque filius eius
Praestitit imperium pollens in vertice rerum:
Vilem ne spernas vilis textum monialis,
Quem praesentari, si digneris reminisci,
Ipse tui claris iussisti nuper ocellis;
Et cum perspicias maculis sordescere crebris,
Ad celerem tanto veniam mox pronior esto,
In monstrando tuis quantum plus pareo iussis:
Si tis praecepto non urgerer metuendo,
Non foret ullomodo mihimet fiducia tanta,
Ut tibi praesentis scrutandum rusticitatis
Auderem satis exiguum praeferre libellum;
Qui, praestante deo patri subiunctus in aula
Ipsius et monitis promptus parere paternis,
Par decus imperii retines concorditer ampli,
Conportans dextra sceptrum regale tenella.
Sed quia te memini sublimiter assimilari
Nato famosi regis David Salomoni,
Qui genitore suo praesente iubenteque sancto
Optata regnum suscepit pace paternum,
Ipsius exemplo te contentum fore spero;
Qui cum regnando resideret in arce superba,
Prudenter legum condens decreta sacrarum
Ac penetrans animo rerum secreta profundo,
Nunc libet et minimis mentem laxare rimandis,
Sed nec conflictum fastidit rite duarum
Solvere iudicii celeri discrimine recti,
Prolem restitui verae mandans genitrici.
Hinc supplex te posco quidem, nostrum Salomonem,
Ut, licet imperii tenearis sollicitandi
Cura, digneris tamen et propriae monialis
Ludendo seriem nunc lectitase recentem,
Quo male compositis verbis mox decidat omnis
Rusticitas oris de tractibus imperialis
Nominis, et titulo signata tui venerando
Despectus nimia meriti tueantur ab aura.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>With this verse epistle, Hrotsvit presents to the son who had asked to see it, the life of his father commissioned by his cousin, abbess Gerberga.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Hrotsvithae Opera</em>, ed. H. Homeyer (Munich: Schöningh, 1970), 388-89.</p>