---
letter_id: "23986"
title: "A letter from Jerome (384?)"
ititle: "a letter from jerome (384?)"
ltr_date: "384?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-18"
url: "/letter/279.html"
senders:
  - id: 21430
    name: Jerome
    iname: jerome
    type: people
    url: /people/21430.html
receivers:
  - id: 34
    name: Paula, the elder
    iname: paula, the elder
    type: woman
    url: /woman/34.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>1.  Antiquity admired Marcus Terentius Varro, because among the Latins/Romans he wrote innumerable books.  The Greeks lavished praise on Chalcenterus because he composed so many books that no one can describe those alien to us by his hand.  And since it is now useless to compose an index of Greek volumes among Romans, I shall recall something of what he wrote in Latin, so that we may understand that we sleep the sleep of Epimenides and the the zeal they showed in studying secular letters we employ in gathering wealth.  (1)
2.  Varro wrote 45 books of Antiquities, 4 on the Life of the Roman people, 15 on Images, 76 Logistorikon [Greek letters], 25 on the Latin Language, 9 on Disciplines [liberal arts], 5 on Latin Speech, 5 on Plautian Questions, 3 Annals, 3 on the Origin of the Latin Language, 3 on Poems, 3 on Stage Origins, 3 on Stage Performance, 3 on Stage Plays, 3 on Descriptions, 3 on the Properties of Writers, 3 on Libraries, 3 on Readings, 3 on the Similarity of Words, 3 on Legations, 3 on Persuasions, 3 on Pompey, 10 Singulars, 3 about Persons, 15 on Civil Law, 9 books summarizing 42 books on Antiquities, 4 summarizing 15 books on Images, 9 summarizing 15 books on the Latin Language, 9 on the Principles of Numbers, 3 on Country Matters, 1 on Preserving Health, 3 on His Life, 3 on the Form of Philosophy, 3 on Urban Matters, 150 on Menippean Satire, 10 books of Poems, 22 of Orations, 6 of Pseudotragedies, 4 of Satires, and many others which it would be long to enumerate.  I have scarcely given you half the list and it is already tiresome to readers.
3.  In contrast, our ages have learned men and they know in what stream fish are born, what bivalve grows on what shore.  We are not in doubt about the saliva of sea-carp, Paxamus and Apicius are always in our hands, our eyes on heredity, our senses on cooking pans, and if anyone among philosophers or Christians who are [the] true philosophers, should have time for reading with an old mantle and a dirty tunic he is driven away like a madman.
4.  To what purpose do I mention Varro and Chalcenterus, you ask?  Let us come rather to our Adamantius, our Chalcenterus, who labored with such sweat in commentaries on holy scriptures that he might justly have the name adamant.  You want to know how many monuments he left to his mind?  Let the following titles show:  he wrote 13 books on Genesis, 2 of Mixed Homelies, selections on Exodus, on Leviticus, 10 books of Miscellanies, 36 on Isaiah, also selections on Isaiah, 1 book on Hosea of Ephraim, a commentary on Hosea, 2 books on Joel, 6 on Amos, 1 on Jonah, 3 on Micah, 2 on Nahum, 3 on Habakkuk, 2 on Zephaniah, 1 on Haggai, 2 on Zechariah, 2 on Malachi, 29 on Ezekiel, selections on the Psalms from the first to the 15th; again 1 book on each of the first 16 Psalms [Jerome lists each separately], 1 each on the 20th, 24th, 29th, 38th, 40th, 2 on the 43rd, 3 on the 44th, 1 on the 45th, 1 on the 46th, 2 on the 50th, 1 each on the 51st, 52nd, 53rd, 57th, 58th, 59th, 62nd, 63rd, 64th, 65th, 68th, 70th, 71st, 1 on the beginning of the 72nd, 2 on the 103rd; 3 books on proverbs, selections on Ecclesiastes, 10 books on the Song of Songs plus two others which he wrote on it in his youth, 5 books on the Lamentations of Jeremiah, also Monobibla, 4 books “Peri archon” (On First Principles), 2 on the Resurrection and 2 other dialogues on the Resurrection, 1 on certain questions in Proverbs, a Dialogue against Candidus Valentinus, a book on Martyrdom.  On the new testament:  25 books on Matthew, 32 on John, 1 book of selections on certains parts of John, 15 on Luke, 15 on the epistle of Paul the apostle to the Romans, 15 on the epistle to Galatians, 3 on the epistle to Ephesians, 1 on the epistle to Philippians, 2 on the epistle to Colossians, 3 on epistle 1 to the Thessalonians, 1 on epistle 2 to the Thessalonians, 1 on the epistle to Titus, 1 on the epistle to Philemon.  Homilies on the old testament:  17 Homilies on Genesis, 8 on Exodus, 11 on Leviticus, 28 on Numbers, 13 on Deuteronomy, 26 on Jesus of Nave [Joshua, son of Nun], 9 on Judges, 8 on Passover/Easter, 4 on the first book of Kings, 22 on Job, 7 on Proverbs, 8 on Ecclesiastes, 2 on the Song of Songs, 32 on Isaiah, 14 on Jerome, 12 on Ezekiel.  Homilies on the Psalms:  1 each on the 3rd, 4th, 8th, 12th, 13th; 3 on the 15th; 1 each on the 16th, 18th, 22nd, 23rd, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th; 5 on the 36th, 2 on the 37th, 2 on the 38th, 2 on the 39th, 1 on the 49th, 1 on the 51st, 2 on the 52nd, 1 on the 54th, 7 on the 67th, 2 on the 71st, 3 on the 72nd, 3 on the 73rd, 1 on the 74th, 1 on the 75th, 3 on the 76th, 9 on the 77th, 4 on the 79th, 2 on the 80th, 1 on the 81st, 3 on the 82nd, 1 on the 83rd, 2 on the 84th, 1 each on the 85th, 87th, 108th, 110th; 3 on the 118th, 1 on the 120th; 2 each on the 121st, 122nd, 123rd, 124th; 1 each on the 125th, 127th, 128th, 129th, 131st; 2 each on the 132nd, 133rd, 134th; 4 on the 135th, 2 on the 137th, 4 on the 138th, 2 on the 139th, 3 on the 144th, 1 each on the 145th, 146th, 147th, and 148th; selections on the whole Psalter.  Homilies on the new testament:  25 on the gospel according to Matthew, 39 on Luke, 17 on Acts of the Apostles, 11 on the 2nd epistle to Corinthians, 2 on the epistle to Thessalonians, 7 on the epistle to Galatians, 1 on the epistle to Titus, 18 on the epistle to Hebrews; one homily on Peace, one Exhortatory to Pionias, one on Fasting, two on Monogamy and Trigamy, 2 on Tarsus; Origen, Firmianus, and Gregory; also selections of Origen and two books of different letters to him — a letter "esifodorum"(2) on the cause/case of Origen in book two —  8 books of his letters to different people, 2 books of other letters, again 2 books of the letter in defense of his works.
5.  Do you not see that the labor of one [man] surpassed Greeks and Romans equally?  For who could ever read as many things as he wrote?  What reward did he receive for this sweat?  He was condemned by bishop Demetrius; except for the priests of Palestine, Arabia, Phoenicia, and Achaia, the world consented to the condemnation.  Rome compels the senate against him not for the novelty of his dogma, not for heresy, as the rabid dogs now claim against him, but because they could not bear the glory of his eloquence and learning and were all considered mute when he spoke.
6.  Why I wrote these things, swiftly, by the fire of a small lantern, but would not have dictated them with cautious speech, you can understand, if you think of Epicurus and Aristippus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>1.  Marcum Terentium Varronem miratur antiquitas, quod apud Latinos tam innumerabiles libros scripserit. Graeci Chalcenterum miris efferunt laudibus, quod tantos libros conposuerit, quantos quivis nostrum alienos sua manu describere non potest et quia nunc otiosum est apud Latinos Graecorum voluminum indicem texere, de eo, qui Latine scripsit, aliqua commemorabo, ut intellegamus nos Epimenidis dormire somnum et studium, quod illi posuerunt in eruditione saecularium litterarum, in congregandis opibus ponere.
2.  Scripsit igitur Varro XLV libros Antiquitatum, IIII De vita populi Romani, Imaginum XV, "Logistorikon" [Greek] LXXVI, De lingua Latina XXV, Disciplinarum VIIII, De sermone Latino V, Quaestionum Plautinarum V, Annalium III, De origine linguae Latinae III, De poematis III, De originibus scaenicis III, De scaenicis actionibus III, De actis scaenicis III, De descriptionibus III, De proprietate scriptorum III, De bibliothecis III, De lectionibus III, De similitudine verborum III, Legationum III, Suasionum III, De Pompeio III, Singulares X, De personis III, De iure civili XV, "Epitomen" [Grk] Antiquitatum ex libris XLII libros VIIII, "Epitomen" ex Imaginum libris XV libros IIII, "Epitomen" de lingua Latina ex libris XV libros VIIII, De principiis numerorum libros VIIII, Rerum rusticarum libros III, De valetudine tuenda librum I, De sua vita libros III, De forma philosophiae libros III, Rerum urbanarum libros III, Satirarum Menippearum libros CL, Poematum libros X, Orationum libros XXII, Pseudotragoediarum libros VI, Satirarum libros IIII et alia plurima, quae enumerare longum est. vix medium descripsi indicem et legentibus fastidium est.
3.  At e contrario nostra saecula habent homines eruditos sciuntque, pisces in quo gurgite nati sint, quae concha in quo litore creverit. de turdorum salivis non ambigimus, Paxamus et Apicius semper in manibus, oculi ad hereditates, sensus ad patinas et, si quis de philosophis vel de Christianis, qui vere philosophi sunt, trito pallio et sordida tunica lectioni vacaverit, quasi vesanus exploditur.
4.  Quorsum Varronis et Chalcenteri mentio facta sit, quaeritis?  videlicet, ut ad Adamantium nostrum nostrumque Chalcenterum veniamus, qui tanto in sanctarum scripturarum commentariis sudore laboravit, ut iuste adamantis nomen acceperit. vultis nosse, quanta ingenii sui reliquerit monimenta?  sequens titulus ostendet:  scripsit In Genesim libros XIII, Mistarum omeliarum libros II, In Exodum excerpta, In Leviticum excerpta, Stromatum libros X, In Isaiam libros XXXVI, item In Isaiam excerpta, In Osee de Effraim librum I, In Osee commentarium, In Iohel libros II, In Amos libros VI, In Ionam librum I, In Micheam libros III, In Naum libros II, In Abacuc libros III, In Sophoniam libros II, In Aggeum librum I, In principio Zachariae libros II, In Malachiam libros II, In Hiezechiel libros XXVIIII, Excerpta in Psalmos a primo usque ad quintum decimum; rursum In Psalmo primo librum I, In secundo librum I, In tertio librum I, In quarto librum I, In quinto librum I, In VIo librum I, In VIIo librum I, In VIIIo librum I, In VIIIIo librum I, In Xo librum I, In XIo librum I, In XIIo librum I, In XIIIo librum I, In XIIIIo librum I, In XVo librum I, In XVIo librum I, In XXo librum I, In XXIIIIo librum I, In XXVIIIIo librum I, In XXXVIIIo librum I, In XLo librum I, In XLIIIo libros II, In XLIIIIo libros III, In XLVo librum I, In XLVIo librum I, In Lo libros II, In LIo librum I, In LIIo librum I, In LIIIo librum I, In LVIIo librum I, In LVIIIo librum I, In LVIIIIo librum I, In LXIIo librum I, In LXIIIo librum I, In LXIIIIo librum I, In LXVo librum I, In LXVIIIo librum I, In LXXo librum I, In LXXIo librum I, In principio LXXmi IIdi librum I, In CIIIo libros II; in Proverbia libros III, In Ecclesiasten excerpta, In Canticum Canticorum libros X et alios tomos II, quos super scripsit in adulescentia, In Lamentationes Hieremiae tomos V, item Monobibla, Periarchon libros IIII, De resurrectione libros II, et alios De resurrectione dialogos II, De Proverbiorum quibusdam quaestionibus librum I, Dialogum adversus Candidum Valentinianum, De martyrio librum; de novo testamento:  In Matheum libros XXV, In Iohannem libros XXXII, In partes quasdam Iohannis excerptorum librum I, In Lucam libros XV, In epistulam Pauli apostoli ad Romanos libros XV, In epistulam ad Galatas libros XV, In epistulam ad Ephesios libros III, In epistulam ad Philippenses librum I, In epistulam ad Colossenses libros II, In epistula ad Thessalonicenses Ia libros III, In epistula ad Thessalonicenses IIa librum I, In epistula ad Titum librum I, In epistula ad Philemonem librum I; rursus omeliarum in vetus testamentum:  In Genesi omeliae XVII, In Exodo omeliae VIII, In Levitico omeliae XI, In Numeris omeliae XXVIII, In Deuteronomio omeliae XIII, In Iesu Nave omeliae XXVI, In libro Iudicum omeliae VIIII, De pascha omeliae VIII, In primo Regnorum libro omeliae IIII, In Iob omeliae XXII, In Paroemias omeliae VII, In Ecclesiasten omeliae VIII, In Cantico Canticorum omeliae II, In Isaiam omeliae XXXII, In Hieremiam omeliae XIIII, In Hiezechiel omeliae XII; de Psalmis: In Psalmo IIIo omelia I, In IIIIo omelia I, In VIIIo omelia I, In XIIo omelia I, In XIIIo omelia I, In XVo omeliae III, In XVIo omelia I, in XVIIIo omelia I, In XXIIo omelia I, In XXIIIo omelia I, In XXIIIIo omelia I, In XXVo omelia I, In XXVIo omelia I, In XXVIIo omelia I, In XXXVIo omeliae V, In XXVIIo omeliae II, In XXXVIIIo omeliae II, In XXXVIIIIo omeliae II, IN XLVIIIIo omelia I, In LIo omelia I, In LIIo omeliae II, IN LIIIIo omelia I, In LXVIIo omeliae VII, IN LXXIo omeliae II, In LXXIIo omeliae III, In LXXIIIo omeliae III, In LXXIIIIo omelia I, In LXXVo omelia I, In LXXVIo omeliae III, In LXXVIIo omeliae VIIII, In LXXVIIIIo omeliae IIII, IN LXXXo omeliae II, In LXXXIo omelia I, In LXXIIo omeliae III, in LXXXIIIo omelia I, In LXXXIIIIo omeliae II, IN LXXXVo omelia I, In LXXXVIIo omelia I, In CVIIIo omelia I, In CXo omelia I, In CXVIIIo omeliae III, In CXXo omelia I, In CXXIo omeliae II, In CXXIIo omeliae II, In CXXIIIo omeliae II, In CXXIIIIo omeliae II, In CXXVo omelia I, In CXXVIIo omelia I, In CXXVIIIo omelia I, In CXXVIIIIo omelia I, In CXXXI omelia I, In CXXXII omeliae II, In CXXXIIIo omeliae II, In CXXXIIIIo omeliae II, In CXXXVo omeliae IIII, IN CXXXVIIo omeliae II, In CXXXVIIIo omeliae IIII, IN CXXXVIIIIo omeliae II, In CXLIIIIo omeliae III, In CXLVo omelia I, In CXLVIo omelia I, In CXLVIIo omelia I, In CXLVIIIIo omelia I, Excerpta in totum psalterium; omeliae in novum testamentum:  In evangelium "kata Matthaion" [Grk] omeliae XXV, In evangelium "kata Loukan" omeliae XXXVIIII, In Actus apostolorum omeliae XVII, In epistula ad Corinthios IIa omeliae XI, In epistula ad Thessalonicenses omeliae II, In epistula ad Galatas omeliae VII, In epistula ad Titum omelia I, In epistula ad Hebraeos omeliae XVIII; De pace omelia I, Exhortatoria ad Pioniam, De ieiunio, De monogamis et trigamis omeliae II, In Tarso omeliae II, Origenis, Firmiani et Gregorii, item Excerpta Origenis et diversarum ad eum epistularum libri II -- epistula + esifodorum super causa Origenis in libro IIo --, Epistularum eius ad diversos libri VIIII, Aliarum epistularum libri II, item Epistula pro apologia operum suorum libri II.
5.  Videtisne et Graecos pariter et Latinos unius labore superatos?  quis enim umquam tanta legere potuit, quanta ipse conscripsit?  pro hoc sudore quid accepit praemii?  damnatur a Demetrio episcopo; exceptis Palaestinae et Arabiae et Phoenices atque Achaiae sacerdotibus in damnationem eius consentit orbis; Roma ipsa contra hunc cogit senatum non propter dogmatum novitatem, non propter heresim, ut nunc adversum eum rabidi canes simulant, sed quia gloriam eloquentiae eius et scientiae ferre non poterant et illo dicente omnes muti putabantur.
6.  Haec quare scripserim et ad pauperis lucernae igniculum cito, sed non cauto sermone dictaverim, potestis intellegere, si Epicuros et Aristippos cogitetis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Jerome answers Paula's request for a detailed bibliography of Origen's works.  Written before his own change of mind, the letter includes an angry attack on those who call Origen a heretic.  Nonetheless, he is careful to write, as he notes, at night and by his own hand, not trusting the material even to his secretary.  The task of copying out such a list is a tribute to Jerome's love for Origen or Paula or both.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) Varro lived from 116 to 27 BC.  He was the most renowned Roman scholar and wrote voluminously but most of his works are lost and indeed their existence is known to us from this list that Jerome sent to Paula.
(2) There is a dagger before this word in the Latin text.  I have not been able to identify this reference.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Eusebii Hieronymi Epistulae</em>, ed. Isidorus Hilberg, 3 v. (New York: Johnson, 1970, repr. CSEL, 1910-18), ep.33</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>384?