---
letter_id: "23713"
title: "A letter from Adalbero, archbishop of Reims (c.984-985)"
ititle: "a letter from adalbero, archbishop of reims (c.984-985)"
ltr_date: "c.984-985"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-08"
url: "/letter/3.html"
senders:
  - id: 21197
    name: Adalbero, archbishop of Reims
    iname: adalbero, archbishop of reims
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 2
    name: Beatrice, countess/duke of Upper Lorraine
    iname: beatrice, countess/duke of upper lorraine
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We rejoice with you that things turned out as you wished, not undeservedly, and since we frequently learn from you things we did not know, we are aware of your sincere affection for us, we hold it as a special possession.  But what so changed the planned conference of reigning ladies that only duke Henry [of Bavaria] should come?  If you know whether that happened by the trick of the other faction and which princes are to come, tell me in full faith.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Rebus vobis ad votum cedentibus non immerito congratulamur, et quia ignorata frequenter per vos addiscimus vestrumque affectum circa nos sincerum experimur, inter praecipua ponimus. Sed quae res institutum colloquium dominarum sic commutavit, ut solus veniat Henricus?  Id an dolo alterius partis agatur et qui principum eo venturi sunt, si novistis, orantibus nobis plena fide perorabitis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Adalbero congratulates Beatrice on an unspecified success, and asks about a change of plans in a meeting of reigning ladies. The ladies who might have been involved in this female "summit" are the empresses Adelaide and Theophanu, Otto III's grandmother and mother, both of whom were regents for him, Adelaide's daughters, queen Emma of France and abbess Matilda of Quedlinburg, countess Beatrice, queen Matilda of Burgundy, and Adelaide, wife of then duke Hugh Capet. Pauline Stafford identifies the "colloquium dominarum" as the site of the final resolution of Henry of Bavaria's struggle for the regency, which he lost, <em>Queens, Concubines and Dowagers</em> (London: Batsford, 1983), 142.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH BDKz ep.62, p.93, dated June-July 985; also HGF9 ep.29, p.282 dated 984, and PL137 ep.15 c510.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.984-985