---
letter_id: "24020"
title: "A letter from Jerome (385)"
ititle: "a letter from jerome (385)"
ltr_date: "385"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2018-11-16"
url: "/letter/313.html"
senders:
  - id: 21430
    name: Jerome
    iname: jerome
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 35
    name: Marcella
    iname: marcella
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Let us comfort ourselves for bodily absence by spiritual conversation, each and every one of us doing what we can do best. You send us gifts, we send you back letters of thanks; with this addition, as it is an offering to virgins who have taken the veil, that we point out to you that there are certain mysteries hidden in those dear presents of yours. Sackcloth is a sign of prayer and fasting; chairs warn us that a virgin does not go abroad; tapers are a reminder to have our lights burning as we await the Bridegroom's coming; cups signify mortification of the flesh and readiness for martyrdom — "How excellent is the Lord's cup that maketh drunk those who partake thereof!"(1) Furthermore, when you offer matrons fans to keep off flies, you show them that they must drive away all those wanton pleasures, which with this world so quickly perish and corrupt the oil of our sweeter life. These are the types and figures that virgins and matrons may find in your gifts. To myself also they have an application; although in my case they go by the rule of contrary. Sitting on chairs is suitable for those who have no work to do, Iying on sackcloth for those who repent of the past, holding cups for those who drink deep. It may be, however, that I shall be glad to light your tapers, both to banish the terrors of the night and also to appease the fears of a guilty conscience.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>1. Ut absentiam corporum spiritus confabulatione solemur. faciat unusquisque, quod praeualet. uos dona transmittitis, nos epistulas remittimus gratiarum, ita tamen, ut, quia uelatarum uirginum munus est, aliqua in ipsis munusculis esse mysteria demonstremus. saccus orationis signum atque ieiunii est; sellae, ut foras pedes uirgo non moueat; cerei, ut accenso lumine sponsi expectetur   aduentus; calices mortificationem carnis ostendunt et semper animum ad martyrium praeparatum — calix quippe domini inebrians perquam optimus --; quod autem et matronis offertis muscaria paruis animalibus uentilanda, procul ab illis abesse debere luxurias, quae cito cum isto interiturae mundo oleum uitae suauioris exterminant. hic typus uirginum, haec figura sit matronarum. nobis autem, in peruersum licet, munera uestra conueniunt: sedere aptum est otiosis, in sacco iacere paenitentibus, calices habere potantibus, licet et propter nocturnos metus et animo semper malo conscientiae formidante cereos quoque accendisse sit gratum.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Jerome thanks Marcella for gifts she has sent to him and the women who work with him, virgins and matrons, and interprets the gifts as a spiritual lesson from her to them.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) Psalm xxiii, 5.  Gallican psalter.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Eusebii Hieronymi Epistulae,</em> ed. Isidorus Hilberg, 3 v. (New York: Johnson, 1970, repr.CSEL, 1910-18), ep.44; translation and annotation from F.A.Wright,<em> Select Letters of St. Jerome (</em>Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1933, repr.1980), pp.176-79.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>385