---
letter_id: "24035"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (July 596)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (july 596)"
ltr_date: "July 596"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-18"
url: "/letter/328.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21362.html
receivers:
  - id: 36
    name: Brunhild, queen of Austrasia and Burgundy
    iname: brunhild, queen of austrasia and burgundy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/36.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory to Brunhild queen of the Franks.
The Christianity of your excellence is known to us so truly for a long time that we may not doubt its goodness in any way, but rather be certain that it concurs devoutly and zealously in all ways in the cause of faith and ministers the comforts of its religious sincerity copiously.  Wherefore we greet [you] confidently with paternal charity and declare that we have learned that the Angles, with God granting, wish to become Christian but the priests in their vicinity do not have pastoral care for them.  So to prevent their souls’ perishing in eternal damnation, we took care to send them the servant of God Augustine, bearer of the presents, whose zeal and dedication is well known to us, with other servants of God so that we might learn more about their will in this and think about their conversion, with your support as far as possible.  We have also enjoined them to bring priests with them from nearby to do those things.  Therefore may your excellence, which is accustomed to be ready to do good works, as much for our request as for the fear of God, deign to hold him commended in all things and vigorously give him the grace of your protection and the help of patronage to his labor, that he might have your favor fully, making it possible for him to go secure in your protection to the above mentioned people of the Angles, so that our God, who adorned you in this world with goods pleasing to him, will also give you joy in eternal rest with his saints.
Further, we ask that our most beloved son Candidus, priest, and the little patrimony of our church that is located there be commended to your Christianity, so they feel the grace of your protection in all things.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Gregorius Brunigildae reginae Francorum.
Excellentiae vestrae christianitas ita nobis veraciter olim innotuit, ut de bonitate eius nullatenus dubitemus, sed magis certum modis omnibus teneamus, quia in causa fidei devote et studiose concurrat et religiosae sinceritatis suae solacia copiosissime sumministret. Ex qua re bene confidentes paterna caritate salutantes indicamus ad nos pervenisse Anglorum gentem Deo annuente velle fieri christianam, sed sacerdotes qui in vicino sunt pastoralem erga eos sollicitudinem non habere. Quorum ne animae in aeterna damnatione valeant deperire, curae nobis fuit praesentium portitorem Augustinum servum Dei, cuius zelum et studium bene nobis est cognitum, cum aliis servis Dei illic dirigere, ut per eos ipsorum potuissemus voluntates addiscere et de eorum conversione vobis quoque adnitentibus, in quantum est possibile, cogitare. Quibus etiam iniunximus ut, ad agenda haec e vicino secum debeant presbyteros ducere. Excellentia ergo vestra, quae prona in bonis esse consuevit operibus, tam pro nostra petitione, quam etiam divini timoris consideratione eum dignetur habere in omnibus commendatum atque ei tuitionis suae gratiam vehementer impendat et labori eius patrocinii sui ferat auxilium et, ut plenissime possit habere mercedem, ad suprascriptam Anglorum gentem sua tuitione securum ire provideat, quatenus Deus noster, qui in hoc vos saeculo bonis sibi placitis decoravit, idem et in aeterna requie cum suis vos sanctis faciat gratulari.
Praeterea dilectissimum filium nostrum Candidum presbyterum et patrimoniolum ecclesiae nostrae quod illic situm est vestrae christianitati commendantes petimus, ut tuitionis vestrae gratiam in omnibus consequatur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Gregory commends to Brunhild Augustine who is on his way to minister to the Angles, and asks her to support him and send others with him.  He also reminds her of Candidus and the Roman patrimony (cf. ep.6.5).  Bede speaks of Gregory sending Augustine, but says nothing of Brunhild’s role (Ecclesiastical History 1.23, 24).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH, <em>Gregorii Pape Registrum Epistolarum</em>, ep.6.57, 1.431-32, also HGF4 ep.17 p.21.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>July 596