---
letter_id: "24047"
title: "A letter from Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury (1103)"
ititle: "a letter from anselm, archbishop of canterbury (1103)"
ltr_date: "1103"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-06-06"
url: "/letter/340.html"
senders:
  - id: 21249
    name: Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury
    iname: anselm, archbishop of canterbury
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 40
    name: Athelits, abbess of St. Mary at Romsey
    iname: athelits, abbess of st. mary at romsey
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Anselm the archbishop: to his reverend mother and dearest daughter Athelits,(1) abbess of Winchester, greeting and blessing.
It is not necessary to write here how and why lord William, the bishop-elect, is leaving England(2) because you can learn it from many other people. Your religion and your prudence will understand, if you reflect on it intently, with what great joy and thanksgiving you should receive the news that God is bestowing such an honor on your bishop. For indeed, greater glory and praise are his in the sight of God and of good men for having been despoiled and exiled for the sake of justice than if he had become wealthy with all the riches and all the possessions of the world by violating justice. Therefore, let his friends rejoice and exult because he could be overcome by no violence or fear, nor could he be separated from truth by any cupidity. May this be your consolation in the face of his expulsion, and may your daily prayer be that God may strengthen and console him. I greet and bless your daughters and mine as much as I can.(3)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Anselmus archiepiscopus:  matri reverandae et filiae carissimae Athelits, abbatissae Wintoniensi, salutem et benedictionem.
Qualiter et cur domnus Willelmus, electus episcopus, de Anglia exeat, non est opus hic scribere, quia per multos alios hoc potestis cognoscere. Quanto autem gaudio et cum quanta gratiarum actione, quia hunc honorem illi facit deus, suscipere debeatis, religio et prudentia vestra intelliget, si intente consideratis. Maior enim gloria et laus est illi apud deum et bonos homines, quia spoliatur et expellitur pro iustitia, quam si omnibus divitiis et omni mundana possessione ditaretur, violata iustitia. Gaudeant igitur et exsultent amici eius, quia nulla violentia, nullo timore potuit superari, nec ulla cupiditate a veritate separari. Haec sit vestra de eius expulsione consolatio, et ad hoc, ut deus illum corroboret et consoletur, vestra cotidiana sit oratio. Saluto et benedico filias vestras et meas, quantum possum.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>In this case, archbishop Anselm writes to the abbess as a fellow supporter of an exiled bishop. It is not clear whether Anselm addresses her as abbess of Winchester because Romsey was in Winchester, or because she had become abbess of Winchester. It is not impossible that she is a different person. Cf. Sharon K. Elkins, <em>Holy Women of Twelfth-Century England</em> (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1988), 180 fn.52.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) See epp.236, 237.
(2) See epp.261, 265, 273, 274, 275.
(3) The translation is reproduced with the permission of the translator and the publisher, Cistercian Publications Inc. Editorial Offices, Institute of Cistercian Studies, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008.  All rights are reserved; downloading and copying for any purpose other than private research is prohibited.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Anselmi Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Opera Omnia</em>, ed. F.S. Schmitt (Edinburgh: T. Nelson, 1946-63), ep.276, 4.190-91; translation and annotation from <em>The Letters of Saint Anselm of Canterbury</em>, trans. Walter Frohlich, Cistercian Studies 97, 3v (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1990-1994), 2.279-280.(3)</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1103