---
letter_id: "24051"
title: "A letter from Cena (723-55)"
ititle: "a letter from cena (723-55)"
ltr_date: "723-55"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-18"
url: "/letter/344.html"
senders:
  - id: 42
    name: Cena
    iname: cena
    type: woman
    url: /woman/42.html
receivers:
  - id: 21286
    name: Boniface
    iname: boniface
    type: people
    url: /people/21286.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the venerable pontiff, Boniface, lover of Christ, Cena the unworthy sends greeting.
I must confess to you, dearest friend, that although my bodily eyes see you but seldom, I never cease to look upon you with the eyes of the spirit. These little gifts are tokens of affection, but are quite unworthy of Your Holiness. Please believe that so long as I live I shall always remember you in my prayers. I beg you by our trusted friendship to be loyal to my insignificance, as I have faith in you, and to aid me with your prayers so that Almighty God may order my life according to His will.
If any of your people should ever come to this country, I beg him to inform me, and if I can be of service in any way by supplying bodily comforts or spiritual support to you or any of yours, pray let me know. I am sure that it will greatly help toward the salvation of my soul, if I follow your commands with my whole strength.
Farewell in the Lord.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Venerando pontifici Bonifatio Christi amatori Cenei, indigna salutem.
Iam fateor tibi, carissime, quia, licet te corporalibus oculis raro intuear, quod te tamen spiritalibus cordis luminibus iugiter aspicere non cesso. Et haec parva munuscula magis indicia caritatis sunt, quam ut tuae sanctitati digna sint. Et hoc tibi notum facio, quod usque ad finem vitae meae te semper in meis orationibus recordor. Et te rogo per creditam amicitiam, ut meae parvitati fidelis sis, sicut in te credo: et ut mihi in tuis orationibus adiuvas, ut Deus omnipotens vitam meam secundum suam voluntatem disponat. Et rogo, ut, si umquam aliquis tuorum ad hanc provinciam veniat, ut meam paupertatem interpellat et, si in aliqua re vel carnalis commodi vel spiritalis amminiculi vel tibi vel alicui tuorum possim adiuvare, ut mihi indicet, et ego — ad magnam salutem animae meae, ut credo — secundum vires meas imperium tuum atque iussionem adimpleam. Vale semper in Deo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Cena sends gifts and affection to Boniface and offers to help anyone of his people who might come to her area.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH, <em>Epistolae Merovingici et Karolini Aevi</em>, 6, S.<em>Bonifacii et Lulli Epistolae,</em> ep.97; translation, Ephraim Emerton, <em>The Letters of Saint Boniface</em> (New York: Columbia University Press, 1940, repr.2000), p.151. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>723-55