---
letter_id: "24055"
title: "A letter from Lambert, bishop of Arras (1096-1100)"
ititle: "a letter from lambert, bishop of arras (1096-1100)"
ltr_date: "1096-1100"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2017-07-18"
url: "/letter/348.html"
senders:
  - id: 21448
    name: Lambert, bishop of Arras
    iname: lambert, bishop of arras
    type: people
    url: /people/21448.html
receivers:
  - id: 43
    name: Clementia of Burgundy, countess of Flanders
    iname: clementia of burgundy, countess of flanders
    type: woman
    url: /woman/43.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Lambert, by the mercy of God bishop of Arras, to his honorable lady Clementia, countess of Flanders, greetings and faithful service with prayers. Lord Manasses, archbishop of Rheims recently sent me a letter for the church of Thérouanne in which he enjoined that an accusation be made against you by us and/or by our letters about Robert and his fortification through which he continues to ravage and lay waste the aforesaid church and the goods of its clerics; and that I make known to him [Manasses] what you answer next Sunday when “people of Zion” is sung. We ask your excellency therefore and we advise your grace, that you answer the archbishop justly and honorably lest he find in some way some guilt or injustice in you against the church of Thérouanne, your mother, because of Robert. Be well always in the Lord. Amen.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p>Lambertus, Dei miseratione Atrebatensis episcopus, honorabili dominae suae Clementiae, Flandrensium Comitissae, salutem et fidele servitium cum orationibus. Domnus Manasses Remensis archiepiscopus nuper mihi misit literas pro Morinensi ecclesia, quibus injunxit ut vos arrationarem per nos et per litteras nostras de Roberto et de munitione ejus, per quam non desistit praedictam ecclesiam et bona clericorum diripere et devastare; et quod inde responderetis, rescire eum facerem in proxima Dominica quando cantabitur <em>Populus Sion</em>. Rogamus ergo excellentiam vestram et honestati vestrae consulimus, quatenus sic juste et honeste archiepiscopo respondeatis, ne in vobis aut culpam aut injustitiam pro Roberto contra Morinensem ecclesiam, matrem vestram, aliquo modo inveniat. Bene valete in Domino semper. Amen.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The bishop writes to the countess at the request of archbishop Manasses to persuade her to stop a man in her service from attacking a church and the possessions of its clerics. <em>Populus Sion</em> is sung on the second Sunday of Advent.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF 15, p.185, ep.18 and PL162 c.662, ep.39; same text except one et/vel.  Also in Le Registre de Lambert Évêque d’Arras (1093-1115), ed Claire Giordanengo (Paris:  CNRS, 2007), E.38.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1096-1100