---
letter_id: "24064"
title: "A letter from Lul (745-46)"
ititle: "a letter from lul (745-46)"
ltr_date: "745-46"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-19"
url: "/letter/357.html"
senders:
  - id: 21461
    name: Lul
    iname: lul
    type: people
    url: /people/21461.html
receivers:
  - id: 45
    name: Eadburg/Eadburga, abbess of Minster in Thanet
    iname: eadburg/eadburga, abbess of minster in thanet
    type: woman
    url: /woman/45.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most reverend and dear-in-Christ abbess Eadburg, an unworthy and insignificant deacon [sends] perennial greetings in the lord.
I beg the mercy of your kindness with deepest prayers, that you deign to remember me in the holy protection of your prayers, as your benign charity promised me through our returning brother N.  I importune you also by resolute prayer, that the ship of my fragility, which is daily shaken by the whirlwind storms of this world, be sustained by the voice of your stability; that I be fortified against the poisoned shafts of the ancient enemy by the repeated help of your prayers.  I have sent very small gifts to your venerable love, that is a silver style, and some incense [storax] and cinnamon, that you might know from these little things how grateful I am for the gifts of your greeting.  And if you wished to command anything from me through the bearer of this letter, who is called Ceola, or through anyone else, your charity which joins us in spiritual kinship knows that my smallness wishes to carry it out with all its efforts.  Meanwhile I ask that you not refuse to send letters of your sweetness to me.
I wish you good health and we desire to advance with holy outcomes in Christ.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Reverentissimae et in Christo carissimae Eadburge abbatisse N. indignus et exiguus diaconus perennem in domino salutem.
Almitatis tuae clementiam intimis obsecro precibus, ut mei memor esse digneris in tuarum sacrosanctis orationum subsidiis; sicut mihi per redeuntem fratrem nostrum N. tua benigna caritas concedens promisit. Hoc etiam obnixa prece flagito, ut meae fragilitatis navem, quae cotidie presentis mundi procellarum turbinibus quatitur, tuae stabilitatis suffragio fulciatur; ut contra antiqui hostis venenata spicula oraminum tuorum frequente iuvamine muniar. Parva munuscula tuae venerandae dilectioni transmisi, id est unum graphium argenteum et storacis et cinnamomi partem aliquam; quatenus ex his minimis cognoscas, allata munera tuae salutationis quam grata mihi sunt. Et si quid mihi per gerulum horum apicum, qui dicitur Ceolae, vel per alium quemlibet imperare volueris, scit caritas illa, quae inter nos est copulata spiritali germanitate, id meam parvitatem totis nisibus implore velle. Interea rogo, ut mihi litteras tuae dulcidinis destinare non deneges.
Bene valere te desidero, et sanctis successibus proficere in Christo optamus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Lul, at this time a deacon, asks the abbess's prayers, sends her presents in gratitude for what she has sent to him, and requests a letter.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH, <em>Epistolae Merovingici et Karolini Aevi,</em> 6, <em>S.Bonifacii et Lulli Epistolae</em>, ep.70.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>745-46