---
letter_id: "24065"
title: "A letter from Eangyth, abbess (719-22)"
ititle: "a letter from eangyth, abbess (719-22)"
ltr_date: "719-22"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-27"
url: "/letter/358.html"
senders:
  - id: 46
    name: Eangyth, abbess
    iname: eangyth, abbess
    type: woman
    url: /woman/46.html
receivers:
  - id: 21286
    name: Boniface
    iname: boniface
    type: people
    url: /people/21286.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the venerable Winfred, called Boniface, blessed of God in faith and love, endowed with the title of priest, crowned with the blossoms of chastity as with a garland of lilies, and learned in doctrine, Eangyth, unworthy handmaid of the handmaids of God and serving without merit under the name of abbess, also her only daughter Heaburg, called Bugga, send greeting in the Holy Trinity.
We have no words to express our thanks for the abundant affection you have shown to us in the letter brought by your messenger from beyond the sea. Well for us if your praise be truly sincere; but it is greatly to be feared that your undeserved praise may be rather reproof than laudation.
Beloved brother in spirit, not in the flesh, renowned for abundance of spiritual graces, to you alone have we desired to impart — and God is our only witness — by this tear-stained letter, under what a load of misery and what a crushing burden of worldly distractions we are weighed down. As when the whirlpools of the foaming sea draw in and out the mountainous waves dashing upon the rocks, when the force of the wind and the violence of the storm drive through a monstrous channel, the keels of ships are upturned and masts are shattered — even so the frail vessels of our souls are shaken by the mighty engines of our miseries and by the multitude of our misfortunes and, as the Word of Truth says of the house of the Gospel: "The rain descended and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house," et cetera.
And first of all and above all, there are those external worldly affairs, which have kept us in turmoll, as I mentioned above, and the chain of innumerable sins, and the lack of full and perfect confidence that whatever we may do is good. We are worried, not only by the thought of our own souls, but — what is still more difficult and more important — by the thought of the souls of all who are entrusted to us, male and female, of diverse ages and dispositions, whom we have to serve and finally to render an account before the supreme judgment seat of Christ not only for our manifest failings, but also for those secret imaginings hidden from men and known to God alone. We have to carry on the fight with a single line of battle against a double one, with ten against twenty thousand. Then there is added the difficulty of our internal administration, the disputes over diverse sources of discord which the enemy of all good sows abroad, infecting the hearts of all men with bitter malice but especially monks and their orders, knowing, as he does, that "mighty men shall be mightily tormented."
We are further oppressed by poverty and lack of temporal goods, by the meagerness of the produce of our fields and the exactions of the king based upon the accusations of those who envy us; as a certain wise man says: "Witchcraft and envy darken many good things." So also our obligations to the king and queen, to the bishop, the prefect, the barons and counts. To enumerate all these would make a long story, much easier to imagine than to put into words.
To all these troubles must be added the loss of friends and compatriots, the crowd of relatives and the company of our kinsfolk. We have neither son nor brother, father nor uncle, only one daughter, whom death has robbed of all her dear ones, excepting one sister, a very aged mother, and a son of a brother, a man rendered unhappy because of his folly and also because our king has an especial grudge against his people. There is no other closely bound to us. God has taken them from us in various ways. Some have died in their native land, and their bodies rest in the foul dust of the earth to rise again in the day of judgment when the Lord's trumpet shall sound, and the whole race of men shall come forth from their dark tombs to render their account, and their spirits borne upon the arms of angels shall reign with Christ where sorrow shall vanish, envy shall fade away, and pain and lamenting shall flee before the face of the saints. But others have left their native shores entrusting themselves to the pathways of the sea and have sought the shrines of the Apostles Peter and Paul and of many martyrs, virgins, and confessors whose names and number only God knows.
For all these and similar reasons which could hardly be counted in one day, even though, as the saying is, July and August should lengthen out the hours of summer, our life is a weariness to us and it is almost a burden to live. Everyone who is unequal to his own task and distrusts his own judgment seeks a faithful friend upon whose counsel he can rely and in whom he can have such confidence that he will lay open to him every secret of his heart. As is said: "What is sweeter than to have some one with whom you can talk of everything as with yourself?" Therefore, on account of all those miseries which we have recounted at too great length, we are compelled to seek a faithful friend, such a one in whom we can confide better than in ourselves, who will consider our pain and sorrow and want, will sympathize with us, console and sustain us by his eloquence, and uplift us by his most wholesome discourse. Long have we sought, and now we believe that we have found in you the friend whom we have wished, prayed, and hoped for. And if God shall grant to us that through his angel — as he sent the prophet Habbakuk into the lions' den with food for Daniel the seer, and Philip, one of the seven deacons, to the eunuch — we may be able to journey into those lands and upon that pilgrimage in which you are engaged and, if we were permitted, to hear the living words from your lips: "How sweet are thy words unto my taste! Yea, sweeter than honey to our mouth!"
But, since we have not been found worthy to do this, separated as we are by a wide expanse of sea and land and the borders of many states, still we desire you, Brother Boniface, to know, in that confidence of which we made mention above, that we have long wished to go to Rome, once mistress of the world, as many of our friends, both relatives and strangers, have done. We would there seek pardon for our sins as many others have done and are still doing — especially I myself, more advanced in years and guilty of more offenses in my life. This desire of mine was known to the Abbess Wala formerly my spiritual mother and also to my only daughter, too young at that time to share my longing.
We are aware that there are many who disapprove of this ambition and disparage this form of devotion. They support their opinion by the argument that the canons of councils prescribe that everyone shall remain where he has been placed; and where he has taken his vows, there he shall fulfill them before God. But, since we all live by diverse impulses and the judgments of God are unknown and hidden from us — as the prophet says: "Thy righteousness is like the mountains of God and thy judgments are a great deep" — and since his secret will and pleasure in this matter are completely hidden from us, therefore, in these dark and uncertain problems, we beseech you with bowed heads to be our Aaron, that is, our mountain of strength, to support us by your prayers, to hold the censer of your intercessions as incense in the Divine Presence, and may the lifting up of your hands be like unto the evening sacrifice. We trust in God and beseech His mercy, that through the supplication of your mouth and your inmost prayers He may show us what He judges most profitable and useful: whether to live on in our native land or go forth upon our pilgrimage. We beg you also to be so kind as to send us word across the sea in reply to what we have scribbled in this letter in our rude, unpolished speech. We have little faith in those who "glory in appearance, but not in heart," but rather in your loyalty and your love toward God and your neighbor.
In regard to that before-mentioned brother, relative, and intimate friend of ours, named Denewald: if it should please God to direct his steps into those parts of the earth and that sojourn abroad in which you are engaged, we beg you to receive him with kindness and, if he shall so request, that you will send him on with your blessing and a favorable recommendation to the venerable brother, priest, and confessor Berhthere, who has long been occupied in that mission.
Farewell, brother in the spirit, most loyal, beloved with pure and sincere affection, and may you be strong and prosper in our beloved Lord. "A friend is long to seek, hard to find, and difficult to keep." Pray for us that our many grievous sins may not work against us.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Benedicto in deo, in fide ac dilectione venerabili Wynfritho cognomento bonifatiob, presbiteratus privilegio praedito et virginalis castimoniae floribus velud liliarum sertis coronato nec non doctrinae scientia erudito, Eangyth, indigna ancilla ancillarum dei et nomine abbatissae sine merito functa, et unica filia eius Heaburg cognomento Buggae in sancta trinitate aeternam salutem.
Ad referendas gratias amplitudinis et dilectionis, qua transmarinis litteris per gerulum scedarum pietatis tuae transmisisti, nullus oris nostri sufficit sermo. Gratulandum est, si vera laus est qua laudati sumus; timendum est valde, ne magis vituperatio sit non merita laus quam laudatio.
Amantissime frater, spiritalis magis quam carnalis et spiritalium gratiarum munificentia magnificatus, tibi soli indicare voluimus et Deus solus testis est nobis, quas cernis interlitas lacrimis: quod multis miseriarum molibus, velud gravissima sarcina aut pressura premente, depressi sumus et saecularium rerum tumultibus. Tamquam spumosi maris vortices verrunt et vellunt undarum cumulos conlisos saxis, quando ventorum violentia et procellarum tempestates saevissime inormem euripum inpellunt, et cymbarum carinae sursum inmutate et malus navis deorsum duratur, haut secus animarum nostrarum naviculae magnis miseriarum machinis et multifaria calamitatum quantitate quatiantur, et velud veritatis voce de evangelica domo dicitur:  “Descendit pluvia, venerunt flumina, flaverunt venti et inpegerunt in domum illam” et reliqua.
Igitur primum omnium ponitur et super omnia alia, quae illa exterius accendunt memorata, innumerabilium concatenatio criminum et nullius boni plena et perfecta fiducia: et non tantum recordatio animarum nostrarum, sed — quod difficilius est et multo gravius — universarum commissarum animarum promiscui sexus et aetatis; et multorum mentibus et diversis moribus deserviturae et postea ante sublime tribunal Christi rationem redditurae non solum pro manifestis peccatis gestorum sive dictorum, sed simul pro occultis cogitationibus quae homines latent, Deo tantum teste, et cum simplici acie adversus duplicem et cum decem milibus adversus viginti milia duellium ducturae. Et additis animabus nostris additur interea domesticae rei difficultas et disputatio diversarum discordiarum, quas seminat omnium bonorum invisor, qui rancida corda virorum inficit malitia et inter omnes homines spargit maxime per monasticos et monachorum contubernia, et scit, quia potentes potenter tormenta patiuntur.
Angit praeterea paupertas et penuria rerum temporalium et angustia cespitis ruris nostri; et infestatio regalis, quia accusamur apud eum ab his, nobis qui invident, ut quidam sapiens ait: “Fascinatio et invidia obscurat multa bona”; similiter servitium regis et reginae, episcopi et praefecti et potestatum et comitum; quae omma enumerare longum est, et facilius possunt mente tractari quam sermone.
Additur his omnibus miseriis amissio amicorum et contribulium caterva propinquorum et consanguineorum turba. Non habemus filium neque fratrem, patrem aut patruum, nisi tantum unicam filiam penitus destitutam omnibus caris in hoc saeculo, praeter unam tantum sororem eius et matrem valde vetulam et filium fratris earum, et illum valde infelicem propter ipsius mentis et quia rex noster eius gentem multum exosam habet. Et nullus est alius, qui noster sit necessarius; sed diversis casibus transtulit illos Deus. Alii obierunt in patrio solo; et corpora eorum in terrae pulvere squalente requiescunt, iterum resurrectura in die necessitatis, quando herilis tuba concrepat et omne humanum genus atris tumbis emergerit, rationem redditura, et spiritus eorum angelicis ulnis evecti regnaturi cum Christo; ubi omnis dolor deficiet et invidia fatescit et fugiet dolor et gemitus a facie sanctorum. Ast alii patria litora reliquerunt et aequoreis campis se crediderunt et sanctorum petivere apostolorum limina Petri et Pauli et multorum martyrum, virginum atque confessorum, quorum numerum et nomina Deus scit.
Pro his omnibus et huiuscemodi causis, que vix uno die enumerari possunt, quamvis, ut dicitur, Sextilis aut Quintilis tempora protelent aestatis, tedebit nos vitae nostrae et pene nobis pertesum est vivere. Omnis homo in sua causa deficiens et in suis consiliis diffidens, querit sibi amicum fidelem, in cuius consiliis confidat, qui in suis diffidet; et talem fiduciam habeat in illo, ut omnem secretum sui pectoris pandet et aperiat, et ut dicitur: quid dulcius est, quam habeas illum, cum quo omnia possis loqui ut tecum? Et ideo, pro his dumtaxat omnibus miseriarum necessitatibus, quae lacinioso sermone enumeravimus, nobis necessarium fuit, ut quaereremus amicum fidelem et talem, in quem confidamus melius quam in nosmet ipsos; qui dolores nostros et miserias et paupertates suas deputaret et conpatiens nobis fuisset et consolaret nos et sustentaret eloquiis suis et saluberrimis sermonibus sublevaret. Diu quaesivimus. Et confidimus, quia invenimus in te illum amicum, quem cupivimus et optavimus et speravimus. Et si nobis Deus dedisset, ut per angelum suum — sicut Ambacuc prophetam cum prandiis in lacum leonum ad Danielum vatem misit et Philippum unum de septem diaconibus ad eunuchum — in illas terras et in illam peregrinationem possemus pervenire, ubi habitas; et si licuisset nobis viva verba ex ore tuo audire, quam dulcia faucibus meis eloquia tua, domine, super mel et favum ori nostro!
Sed quia hoc nostris meritis non meruimus, sed longo intervallo terrae marisque et multarum provinciarum terminis dividimur, tamen pro hac fiducia supra memorata notum tibi facere volumus, frater Bonifatius: quia multum temporis fluxit, ex quo desiderium habuimus, sicut plurimi ex necessariis nostris et cognatis sive alienis, dominam quondam orbis Romam peteremus et ibi peccatorum nostrorum veniam impetremus, sicut alii multi fecerunt et adhuc faciunt, et ego maxime, quae aetate provectior sum et multa pluriora in vita mea commisi et perpetravi. Et huius meae voluntatis atque propositi milli conscia fuit Wale, abbatissa quondam mea et mater spiritalis. Et unica filia adhuc in annis iuvenilibus fuit, et huius rei desiderium querere nescivit. Sed quia scimus, quod multi sunt, qui hanc voluntatem vituperant et hunc amorem derogant et eorum sententiam his adstipulantibus adfirmant: quod canones synodales praecipiant, ut unusquisque in eo loco, ubi constitutus fuerit et ubi votum suum voverit, ibi maneat et ibi Deo reddat vota sua; sed quia universi diversa voluntate vivimus et nobis incerta re et occulta Dei iudicia, sicut ait propheta: “Iustitia tua sicut montes Dei, et iudicia tua abyssus multa,” et eius secreta voluntas et dispensatio in hac re nobis valde occulta est: pro his ergo incertis et occultis ambae te supplices atque prostratis vultibus flagitamus, ut sis nobis Aaron, id est mons fortitudinis, orationum tuarum nos suffragio fulcias et dirigas turibulum deprecationum tuarum sicut incensum in conspectu divinitatis, et elevatio manuum tuarum conparetur sacrificio vespertine. Vere enim confidimus in Deum et eius clementiam exoramus, ut per supplicationem oris tui et orationes medullatas ostendat nobis per te, quod profuturum et utile iudicaverit: sive in patrio solo vivere vel in peregrinatione exalare. Similiter postulamus pietatem tuam, ut tua rescripta trans pontum dirigere digneris et respondeas his, quibus in his kartis caraxavimus rustico stilo et inpolito sermone, quia non multam fiduciam habemus aput eos, qui in facie gloriantur et non in corde, set de tua fide et caritate in Deum et dilectione in proximum.
Et illum fratrem — supra memoratum sine nomine — necessarium amicum nostrum Denewaldum, si Deus disponat vel decreverit, ut dirigat viam eius in illas partes terrae et peregrinationem illam, in qua habitas, tu illum cum caritate et dilectione suscipias et, si voluntas eius vel desiderium flagitat, cum tua benedictione et gratia et eulogia dirigere digneris ad venerabilem fratrem nomine Berhtheri, presbiteratus gratia decoratum et confessionis titulo notatum, qui diu incoluit illam peregrinationem.
Vale, frater spiritalis fidelissime atque amantissime et sincera et pura dilectione dilectissime; et prosperis successibus polle in Domino dilecto.  Amicus die quaritur, vix invenitur, difficile servatur.  Ora pro nobis, ut non noccant nobis noxarum erimina amara.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>In response to a letter from Boniface, Eangyth pours out her distress in powerful sea metaphors that evoke Anglo-Saxon poetry.  She speaks of her worries about fulfilling her responsibilities as abbess, the problems she has with the monks under her, with lack of necessities and oppressive taxes, with loss of family and protectors, her desire to go to Rome, though she knows some say the canons require her to stay where she made her vows.  She asks Boniface to pray for her guidance, and recommends a monk who is also a relative.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH, <em>Epistolae Merovingici et Karolini Aevi</em>, 6, <em>S.Bonifacii et Lulli Epistolae</em>, ep.14; translation, Ephraim Emerton, <em>The Letters of Saint Boniface</em> (New York: Columbia University Press, 1940, repr.2000), pp.14-8. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>719-22