---
letter_id: "24069"
title: "A letter from Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury (1104)"
ititle: "a letter from anselm, archbishop of canterbury (1104)"
ltr_date: "1104"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-01"
url: "/letter/362.html"
senders:
  - id: 21249
    name: Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury
    iname: anselm, archbishop of canterbury
    type: people
    url: /people/21249.html
receivers:
  - id: 49
    name: Eulalia, abbess of Shaftesbury
    iname: eulalia, abbess of shaftesbury
    type: woman
    url: /woman/49.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Anselm the archbishop: to his dearest sisters in Christ, to the lady abbess of St Edward, Eulalia,(1) and all her and his daughters, sending the greeting and blessing of God, and his own, for what it is worth.
Through a certain servant of the king who brought me the King's seal your love has asked, as he said, to be greeted by a letter from us. I preferred to do this by a messenger of mine whom I knew I would soon be sending to England. I know that the abundance of true and pious love makes you eagerly wish to see my letter. As you cannot have my presence, which you long for with pious affection according to your will, you can at least display it to some extent to yourself through my letter, and perhaps refresh your memory of me so that it may not fade away. All this I impute to the greatness of your sincere affection. Since you ask for a letter of mine so that in it you may in some way see me and refresh your memory of me, I recognize that you have a true memory of me. Moreover, just as I know that your goodwill and sincere love for me is not growing cold, so you should know that mine for you is not growing cool.
Indeed, I desire most of all that you remember me and love me as you do so that, as you know my desire, you should all strive to burn increasingly in the love of God and that you who are subject to your mother should endeavour to display obedience, not to the eye but in the inmost heart. I know that you are putting up with adversities and tribulations from every side but under these circumstances you should be especially zealous in guarding your order and your way of life because you obtain the consolation of God better by leading a good life than if for the sake of some worldly impediment you slacken the fervor of your intention. In whatever secluded place you may be, be certain and have no doubt at all that each one of you has her own angel who sees and notes every thought and action and reports it to God the judge.(2) I advise you therefore, dearest daughters, that both in secret and in public each one should so guard all the movements of her heart and body as if she sees her guardian angel present to her bodily eyes. May almighty God protect you with his blessing and lead you to the sight of his glory. Amen.(3)
I know that you want to know something about our return but at present I cannot write you anything certain. Pray that it may come about according to God's good pleasure and will.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Anselmus archiepiscopus: sororibus suis in Christo carissimis, domnae abbatissae de Sancto Edwardo Eulaliae et omnibus filiabus eius et suis, salutem et benedictionem dei et suam, quantum valet.
Per quendam servientem regis, qui mihi sigillum eius detulit, petiit dilectio vestra, sicut ipse dixit, nostris litteris salutari. Quod facere malui per legatum meum, quem sciebam me in proximo tunc missurum in Angliam.  Scio quia abundantia verae et religiosae dilectionis hoc facit, ut litteras meas libenter videre velitis. Ut cum meam praesentiam, quam religioso affectu desideratis, secundum voluntatem vestram habere non potestis, saltem per epistolam meam aliquatenus illam vobis exhibeatis, et forsitan ut in me memoriam vestri, quasi ne obdormiat, excitetis. Quod totum magnitudini imputo sincerae dilectionis. In hoc enim cognosco quia vos vere memoriam mei habetis, cum et litteras meas quaeritis, ut in eis me quodam modo videatis, et me ad memoriam vestri excitetis. Denique sicut scio quia bona voluntas et sincera dilectio in vobis erga me non frigescit, ita scitote quia erga vos in me non tepescit.
In hoc autem maxime volo vos mei memores esse, et me, sicut facitis, diligere, ut sicut scitis desiderium meum, in amore dei omnes studeatis indesinenter fervere, et vos quae subditae estis matri vestrae, oboedientiam non ad oculum, sed intimo corde satagatis exhibere. Scio quia adversitates et tribulationes ex diversis partibus sustinetis, sed tunc magis ad ordinis et vitae vestrae custodiam studere debetis, quia plus bene vivendo consolationem dei impetratis, quam si aliquatenus propter aliqua saeculi impedimenta a vestri propositi fervore cessatis. In quocumque secreto sitis, certae estote nec ullatenus dubitetis quia unaquaeque habet angelum suum, qui omnes cogitatus et actus eius videt et notat et ad iudicem deum reportat. Moneo itaque vos, filiae carissimae, ut in occulto et in aperto unaquaeque sic omnes motus cordis et corporis sui custodiat, ac si ipsum angelum custodem suis oculis corporalibus praesentem videat. Omnipotens deus vos sua benedictione proteget et ad conspectum gloriae suae perducat. Amen.
De reditu nostro scio quia vultis aliquid cognoscere; sed nihil certum vobis ad praesens possum scribere. Orate ut fiat secundum beneplacitam voluntatem dei.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>From his exile, archbishop Anselm writes that he has received their message asking for a letter, acknowledges their affection, and sends spiritual advice.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) See epp.183, 403.
(2) See RB 7:28.
(3) The translation is reprinted with the permission of the translator and the publisher, Cistercian Publications Inc. Editorial Offices, Institute of Cistercian Studies, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008.  All rights are reserved; downloading and copying for any purpose other than private research is prohibited.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Anselmi Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Opera Omnia</em>, ed. F.S. Schmitt (Edinburgh: T. Nelson, 1946-63), ep.337, 5.274-75; translation and annotation from <em>The Letters of Saint Anselm of Canterbury,</em> trans. Walter Fröhlich, Cistercian Studies 142, 3v (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1990-1994), 3.63-65.(3)</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1104