---
letter_id: "23747"
title: "A letter from Bernard of Clairvaux, abbot (c.1140?)"
ititle: "a letter from bernard of clairvaux, abbot (c.1140?)"
ltr_date: "c.1140?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-10"
url: "/letter/37.html"
senders:
  - id: 21275
    name: Bernard of Clairvaux, abbot
    iname: bernard of clairvaux, abbot
    type: people
    url: /people/21275.html
receivers:
  - id: 12
    name: Matilda of Boulogne, queen of England
    iname: matilda of boulogne, queen of england
    type: woman
    url: /woman/12.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his most beloved daughter in Christ, Matilda, by the grace of God queen of the English, Bernard called abbot of Clairvaux:  to reign in perpetuity with the angels.
Since the occasion offers, we greet your majesty in the Lord willingly and from affection of the heart, suggesting not only willingly but confidently what we know pertains to your salvation and the glory of your kingdom.  Accordingly, if you fear God and if you wish to acquiesce to our counsel in anything, do everything to prevent that man from occupying the church of York any longer, about whose life and entry into the episcopacy religious men in whom one must trust give such [negative] testimony.
We commit this, God’s cause, to you — act so that it be brought to worthy conclusion.  And protect (hold commended) all those who have worked for this side, that they not suffer offense from the king or any harm on its account.  They have done good work.  Further, if you get the Lord King to renounce this sacrilege of intrusion into the election before his bishops and princes, which he should only have [the right of] assent to, know that it would bring great honor to God, great safety and security to the king and to what is his, great utility to the whole kingdom.
Fare well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilectissimae in Christo filiae Mathildae, Dei gratia Anglorum reginae, Bernardus, Claraevallis vocatus abbas: in perpetuum regnare cum angelis.
Cum se praebet occasio, libenter et ex cordis affectu vestram salutamus in Domino maiestatem, non solum libenter sed et fiducialiter suggerentes quae ad salutem vestram et gloriam regni vestri novimus pertinere. Proinde, si Deum timetis et si in re aliqua nostro vultis acquiescere consilio, agite omnino ne ulterius occupet Eboracensem ecclesiam homo ille de cuius vita, de cuius introitu in episcopatum, tale perhibent testimonium viri religiosi et quibus omnino credendum est. Vobis committimus hanc causam Dei, vos agite ut digno effectui mancipetur. Ornnes quoque qui pro parte hac laboraverunt commendatos habete, ut nec regis offensam nec damnum aliquod propterea patiantur. Bonum igitur opus operati sunt. Porro, si faceretis Dominum Regem coram episcopis suis et principibus abrenuntiare huic sacrilegio de invasione electionum, ut quem so1um debet habere, solum sibi retineret assensum, scitote quia magnus Dei honor esset, magna salus et securitas Regis atque suorum, magna regni totius utilitas. Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Stephen had suggested his nephew William Fitzherbert for the see of York and invested him after an election which was fiercely contested.  The dispute continued for six years.  Bernard wrote a threatening letter to Stephen, pointing out that God has already scourged him, and may remove him altogether unless he accepts what the pope decreed and honors free elections (ep.533).  To Matilda, Bernard speaks more gently but asks her to take strong action in God’s cause.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Bernardi Opera,</em>v.8, ed. J. LeClercq and H. Rochais (Rome: Eds. Cisterciennes, 1977), ep.534, p.499, date c.1140?</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1140?