---
letter_id: "24080"
title: "A letter from Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury (1102)"
ititle: "a letter from anselm, archbishop of canterbury (1102)"
ltr_date: "1102"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/373.html"
senders:
  - id: 21249
    name: Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury
    iname: anselm, archbishop of canterbury
    type: people
    url: /people/21249.html
receivers:
  - id: 54
    name: Ida of Lorraine, countess of Boulogne
    iname: ida of lorraine, countess of boulogne
    type: woman
    url: /woman/54.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Anselm the archbishop: to his dearest lady, mother and daughter, countess Ida,(1) greeting and god's blessing and his own, for what it is worth.
I give thanks to your highness for the kindness and generosity you showed to our envoys(2) who recently returned from Rome and which you are accustomed to show me and all of our people.
Concerning the matter of which you informed me through Dom John, I can see no fault on your side. But since it is always safer in such matters to fear rather than to trust, I praise your fear because "Blessed is the man who is always fearful."(3) And blessed Job says: "I am afraid of all my works."(4) Therefore I consider that, solely through this fear and the grief you have had because of the evil caused by evil men, you have rendered sufficient satisfaction to God as far as you should. Nevertheless, as I know what you desire, I hereby pray God to absolve you from this and all your sins and to lead you to the vision of his glory. Amen. At your convenience recite one psalter for all your sins.(5)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Anselmus archiepiscopus: dominae et matri et filiae carissimae, Idae comitissae, salutem et benedictionem dei et suam, si quid valet.
Gratias ago celsitudini vestrae pro benignitate et largitate quam legatis nostris nuper Roma redeuntibus exhibuistis, sicut mihi et omnibus nostris facere soletis.
De hoc quod mihi per domnum Iohannem mandastis, nullam possum vestram culpam intelligere. Sed quoniam semper tutius est in huiusmodi magis timere quam confidere, laudo timorem vestrum, quia "beatus homo, qui semper est pavidus." Et beatus Iob dicit: "Verebar omnia opera mea." Solo igitur hoc timore et mali quod contigit per malos homines dolore, quem habuistis, credo vos deo, quantum ad vos pertinet, satisfecisse. Quoniam tamen scio quid desideretis, oro deum ut vos ab hoc et ab omnibus peccatis vestris absolvat et ad gloriae suae contemplationem perducat. Amen. Unum psalterium pro omnibus peccatis vestris dicite secundum opportunitatem vestram.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Archbishop Anselm thanks the countess for her reception of his envoys on their return from Rome, and absolves her of something she had had recounted to him, although he finds no fault in her action.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) See Ep 82.
(2) Anselm's envoys were Baldwin and Alexander; on the king's envoys, see Ep 217. They had left England affer the Winchester court of October 1101, possibly early in 1102, HN 132. They were in Rome for Easter 1102, see Epp 222, 223, 224, 225, 226. They seem to have returned in late summer, probably delayed because one of the king's envoys, Gerard of York, turned south to visit Count Roger of Sicily after leaving the Pope, see N. Cantor, Church, Kingship and Lay Investiture (Princeton, 1958) 161. The outcome of the embassy was debated at the Michaelmas court at Westminster in 1102, HN 137-141.
(3) Pr 28:14. 
(4) Jb 9:28.
(5) The translation is reproduced with the permission of the translator and the publisher, Cistercian Publications Inc. Editorial Offices, Institute of Cistercian Studies, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008.  All rights are reserved; downloading and copying for any purpose other than private research is prohibited.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Anselmi Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Opera Omnia</em>, ed. F.S. Schmitt (Edinburgh: T. Nelson, 1946-63), ep.247, 4.157; translation and annotation from <em>The Letters of Saint Anselm of Canterbury,</em> trans. Walter Fröhlich, Cistercian Studies 97, 3v (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1990-94), 2.230-31.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1102