---
letter_id: "24084"
title: "A letter from Lul (732-55)"
ititle: "a letter from lul (732-55)"
ltr_date: "732-55"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-12"
url: "/letter/377.html"
senders:
  - id: 21461
    name: Lul
    iname: lul
    type: people
    url: /people/21461.html
receivers:
  - id: 55
    name: Lioba/Leobgytha/Leoba, abbess of Tauberbischofsheim
    iname: lioba/leobgytha/leoba, abbess of tauberbischofsheim
    type: woman
    url: /woman/55.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To Lioba, beloved sister in Christ, Lul, the humble servant of the pupils of our master Boniface, greetings in the Lord.
I cannot believe that in thy zeal and wisdom thou art unmindful of the gospel words, "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."(1) This poverty must be borne patiently, on the authority of the same evangelist, who says: "In your patience possess ye your souls."(2) Retain also in thy heart these words of David, "According to the multitude of my sorrows in my heart, Thy comforts have given joy to my soul."(3)
Though for a long time since we have been kept apart in the body, thou must not believe that our true kinship in the Lord has been given over to contempt or forgetfulness. Nor must thou suppose that I am at all weary in thy business, but only, as thou shouldst know, occupied by the crafty wiles of the devil and worn out by the cunning assaults of his ministers, so that, in the words of the prophet, "I am weary of my life because of the sons of iniquity."(4)
Should anything be wanting to thy needs, tell me of it through the deacon Gundwin, who is to return here. Exhort him that he may not slacken in his efforts on my behalf, for any one willing to bear my tribulations along with me is but rarely found.
Farewell in God, and intercede for me the more earnestly that I am crushed by ever-increasing perplexities.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Sorori in Christo carissimae Leobgythae Lullus exigiuus, servus autem domni Bonifacii discipulorum, in domino salutem.
Non inmemorem tuae sagacitatis industriam estimo evangelicae sententiae, qua dicitur: “Beati pauperes spiritu, quoniam ipsorum est regnum caelorum.” Illa paupertas patienter ferenda est, eodem evangelista testante, qui ait: “In patientia vestra possidebitis animas vestras.” Illud Daviticum corde retinens, quia “secundum multitudinem dolorum tuorum consolationes Dei letificaverunt animam tuam.” Nec enim contemptui vel oblivioni tuam sinceram in Domino germanitatem deditam arbitreris, quamvis per indutias temporum corporali praesentia secernamur. Neque in tuis necessitatibus fessum me esse ullo modo autumes; sed tantum diabolicae fraudis astutia praeoccupatum atque ministrorum eius subdola insectatione fatigatum scias, ut iuxta profetae dictum tedeat me vitae meae propter filios nequitiae. Quicquid autem necessitatibus tuis desit, per Gundwinum diaconum reversurum indicato. Suggere illi, ut in laboribus meis non lassescat; quia valde rarus est, qui tribulationes meas mecum participare velit.
Vale in Deo, intercedens pro me tanto enixius, quanto graviore angustia deprimor.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Lul apologizes to Lioba for the long separation and assures her of his devotion, telling her to let him know through the deacon who bears the letter anything she needs from him, but also asking her to exhort the deacon to his duty, apparently because her word will carry weight with him.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>1. &nbsp;Luke 6:20. &nbsp;<br>2. Luke 21:19. &nbsp;<br>3. Ps. 93:19. &nbsp;<br>4. Job 10:1.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH, Epistolae Merovingici et Karolini Aevi, 6, S.Bonifacii et Lulli Epistolae, ep.100; translation and annotation from Edward Kylie, <em>The English Correspondence of Saint Boniface</em> (New York: Cooper Square, 1966, first pub.1911), pp.106-7.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>732-55