---
letter_id: "24087"
title: "A letter from Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury (1099-1100)"
ititle: "a letter from anselm, archbishop of canterbury (1099-1100)"
ltr_date: "1099-1100"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-09"
url: "/letter/380.html"
senders:
  - id: 21249
    name: Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury
    iname: anselm, archbishop of canterbury
    type: people
    url: /people/21249.html
receivers:
  - id: 56
    name: Richeza, sister of Anselm of Canterbury
    iname: richeza, sister of anselm of canterbury
    type: woman
    url: /woman/56.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Anselm, by the grace of god archbishop of Canterbury: to his beloved brother and friend Burgundius, and his wife Richeza,(1) his own sister, health and the blessing of god, and his own, for what it is worth.
You have informed me, my dearest lord and friend Burgundius, that you wish to go to Jerusalem(2) for the service of God and the salvation of your soul, and that you wish to do this with my consent and that of your son, my nephew Anselm. I rejoice to hear of your good intention and advise and beseech you so to make this journey that you do not carry with you the sins you have committed nor leave your sins at home, but make a resolution to live a good life from now on, as befits a true Christian of your rank. Make a confession of all your sins from childhood, one by one, as far as you can remember. See that you have no sin in respect of your wife, whose goodness you know better than I; she shall so remain behind that she may not be without support and counsel, whatever God may do with you, nor be driven from your house and estate against her will as long as she lives so that she may be able to serve God for the salvation of your body and soul, and for her own soul and that of your children. Dispose of all your possessions, just as you would do if you knew you were about to die and immediately give God an account of your whole life. You ask for our permission. I pray God that in all things you may always and everywhere have God's permission, counsel, help and protection.
I charge you, my dearest sister, turn your whole will and your whole life towards serving God. Since God has taken from you every delight of this life believe that he has done this so that you may delight in him alone. Love him, long for him, think of him, serve him at all times and in all places.
May almighty God always bless you both.(3)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Anselmus, gratia dei archiepiscopus Cantuariae: fratri et amico dilecto Burgundio et uxori eius, sorori suae Ricezae, salutem et benedictionem dei et suam, quantum potest.
Mandastis mihi, domine et amice carissime Burgundi, vos velle ire Ierosolimam pro servitio dei et salute animae vestrae, et hoc vos velle facere concessione mea et filii vestri, nepotis mei Anselmi. Gaudeo de vestra bona voluntate et consulo et precor, ut sic hanc viam faciatis, ut nec vobiscum peccata quae fecistis portetis, nec domi peccatum relinquatis, et ut deinceps voluntatem bene vivendi sicut verus Christianus vestri ordinis habeatis. Facite confessionem omnium peccatorum vestrorum nominatim ab infantia vestra, quantum recordari potestis. Videte ne peccatum habeatis super uxore vestra, cuius bonitatem vos melius cognoscitis quam ego; sed ita remaneat, ut non sit sine auxilio et consilio, quidquid deus de vobis faciat, nec expellatur a domo et honore vestro contra voluntatem suam, quamdiu ipsa vivet, ut possit deo servire pro salute corporis et animae vestrae et pro anima sua et filiorum vestrorum. Disponite totam rem vestram, sicuti faceretis, si in praesenti vos moriturum et deo redditurum rationem de tota vita vestra sciretis. Nostram licentiam quaeritis. Dei licentiam et consilium et auxilium et protectionem ora deum, ut in omnibus semper et ubique habeatis.
Tibi dico, soror mea carissima, converte totam intentionem tuam et totam vitam tuam ad serviendum deo; et quod deus abstulit tibi omnem delectationem huius vitae, crede quia ideo fecit, ut in illo solo delecteris. Illum ama, illum desidera, illum cogita, illi servi omnibus horis, in omnibus locis.
Omnipotens deus vos semper ambos benedicat.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Anselm encourages his brother-in-law in his planned pilgrimage to Jerusalem and advises him to prepare not only his soul but also his worldly goods to take care of his wife, Anselm’s sister.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) See Epp 211, 258.
(2) Possibly in the wake of the first crusade, 1096. Rule II 209, suggests that he left for Jerusalem in spring or summer 1100 having written to Anselm the previous autumn. Burgundius may never have returned from his pilgrimage, Southern, Anselm, 9.
(3) The translation is reproduced with the permission of the translator and the publisher, Cistercian Publications Inc. Editorial Offices, Institute of Cistercian Studies, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008.  All rights are reserved; downloading and copying for any purpose other than private research is prohibited.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Anselmi Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Opera Omnia,</em> ed. F.S. Schmitt (Edinburgh: T. Nelson, 1946-63), ep.264, 4.179; translation and annotation from <em>The Letters of Saint Anselm of Canterbury,</em> trans. Walter Fröhlich, Cistercian Studies 97, 3v (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1990-94), 2.262-63.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1099-1100