---
letter_id: "24098"
title: "A letter from Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury (c.1107)"
ititle: "a letter from anselm, archbishop of canterbury (c.1107)"
ltr_date: "c.1107"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-06-07"
url: "/letter/391.html"
senders:
  - id: 21249
    name: Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury
    iname: anselm, archbishop of canterbury
    type: people
    url: /people/21249.html
receivers:
  - id: 63
    name: Basilia, widow
    iname: basilia, widow
    type: woman
    url: /woman/63.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Anselm, the archbishop: to Basilia,(1) his dearest friend and daughter in the Lord, sending the greeting and blessing of God, and his own, if it is worth anything.
I learned from your messenger that you eagerly long for a letter from us. In this I perceive your goodwill and Christian intention, for I do not see any reason why you should desire it except that you wish to receive from it some sound advice for your soul. Therefore, although the whole of Holy Scripture, if you have it explained to you, teaches you how you ought to live, yet I ought not to be miserly and inexorable to your holy petition.
Let me tell you something, dearest daughter, which, if you frequently consider it with the complete attention of your mind, will enable you to inflame your heart greatly to the fear of God and the love of a good life. Let there always be before the eyes of your mind the fact that this life has an end and that no one knows when the last day, which he is constantly approaching day and night, will come. This life is a journey.(2) For as long as man lives, he is always moving. He is always either ascending or descending. Either he is ascending towards heaven or descending to hell. Whenever he does any good deed he makes one step up, and when he sins in any way he makes one step down. This ascent or descent is perceived by each soul when it leaves the body. Whoever strives diligently while living here to climb by good conduct and good deeds will be placed in heaven with the holy angels; and whoever descends through bad conduct and bad deeds will be buried in hell with the fallen angels. You should be aware that it is much quicker and easier to descend than to ascend. For this reason a Christian man and a Christian woman should consider carefully in each of their desires or actions whether they are ascending or descending; and they should embrace with their whole heart those things in which they see themselves ascending. Those things, however, in which they perceive descent they should flee and abhor just as they would hell. Therefore I admonish and advise you, most beloved daughter and friend in God, that as far as possible with the help of God you should draw back from every sin, great or small, and engage in holy deeds.
I pray almighty God to protect, direct and preserve you always and everywhere. Amen.(3)(4)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Anselmus archiepiscopus: Basiliae, amicae et filiae in domino carissimae, salutem et benedictionem dei et suam, si quid valet.
Didici per legatos vestros quia vehementer desideratis litteras nostras.  In quo recognosco vestram bonam voluntatem et Christianam intentionem.  Nihil enim video cur illas desideretis, nisi ut ex illis aliquod consilium animae vestrae salubre inde accipiatis. Quamvis ergo tota sacra scriptura vos doceat qualiter vivere, debeatis, si eam vobis exponi facitis: non tamen debeo esse avarus neque inexorabilis religiosae petitioni vestrae.
Dicam igitur vobis, filia carissima, aliquid quod, si frequenter tota intentione mente pertractaveritis, multum cor vestrum ad timorem dei et ad amorem bene vivendi accendere poteritis. Semper sit ante oculos mentis vestrae quia vita praesens finem habet, et nescit homo quando ultima dies, ad quam indesinenter die ac nocte propinquat, adveniat. Vita praesens via est. Nam quamdiu vivit homo, non facit nisi ire. Semper enim aut ascendit aut descendit. Aut ascendit in caelum, aut descendit in infernum. Cum facit aliquod bonum opus, facit unum passum ascendendo, cum vero aliquo modo peccat, facit unum passum descendendo. Iste ascensus vel descensus tunc cognoscitur ab unaquaque anima, quando exit de corpore. Qui sollicite studet, dum hic vivit, bonis moribus et bonis operibus ascendere, in caelo collocabitur cum sanctis angelis; et qui malis moribus et malis operibus descendit, in inferno sepelietur cum perditis angelis. Hoc utique notandum est, quia valde velocius et facilius descenditur quam ascenditur. Quapropter in singulis voluntatibus et actibus suis debet Christianus et Christiana diligenter considerare si ascendat aut si descendat; et toto corde ea in quibus videt se ascendere, amplectatur; atque illa in quibus cognoscit descensum, sicut infernum fugiat et execretur. Moneo itaque et consulo, vobis, amica in deo et filia dilectissima, ut in quantum adiuvante deo potestis, ab omni peccato magno vel parvo vos retrahatis et in sanctis actibus vos exerceatis.
Oro omnipotentem deum, ut ipse vos semper et ubique protegat, dirigat et custodiat. Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Archbishop Anselm responds to his friend's request for a letter with spiritual advice about life as a journey either to heaven or to hell.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) The widow of Hugh de Gournay, living at Bec, see Epp 68, 147. 
(2) See Ep 183. 
(3) Possibly sent together with Ep 419 to Bec.
(4) The translation is reprinted with the permission of the translator and the publisher, Cistercian Publications Inc. Editorial Offices, Institute of Cistercian Studies, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008.  All rights are reserved; downloading and copying for any purpose other than private research is prohibited.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Anselmi Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Opera Omnia</em>, ed. F.S. Schmitt (Edinburgh: T. Nelson, 1946-63), ep.420, 5.365-66; translation and annotation from <em>The Letters of Saint Anselm of Canterbury</em>, trans. Walter Frohlich, Cistercian Studies 142, 3v (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1990-94), 3.191-92.(4)</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1107