---
letter_id: "24103"
title: "A letter from Matilda of Scotland, queen of the English (5/ or 6/1106)"
ititle: "a letter from matilda of scotland, queen of the english (5/ or 6/1106)"
ltr_date: "5/ or 6/1106"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-07"
url: "/letter/396.html"
senders:
  - id: 64
    name: Matilda of Scotland, queen of the English
    iname: matilda of scotland, queen of the english
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21249
    name: Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury
    iname: anselm, archbishop of canterbury
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To her most beloved lord and father, Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury: Matilda,
queen of the English, sending incessant greetings with love and faithful service.
The consoling love of your holiness may not be unaware, dearly beloved father, that my soul will be seriously disturbed by your very long and wearisome absence.(1) Indeed, the sooner and the closer the date of your desired return is promised to me by many people,(2) the more it is desired by me, since I long to enjoy your presence and conversation. My soul, most reverend father, will therefore not be delighted by any perfect joy or brightened by any true affection until I am able to rejoice at seeing again your presence for which I long with all the strength of my soul. In the meantime, separated from you, I implore the mellifluous sweetness of your kindness to deign to console and gladden me by the charm of your correction and the charm of your letter.
May the almighty and holy Lord protect you everywhere and make me happy by your return into my presence. Amen.(3)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilectissimo domino suo et patri ANSELMO, Cantuariensi archiepiscopo: MATHILDIS, Anglorum regina, salutem continuam cum dilectione et servitium fidele.
Non ignoret, carissime pater, vestrae sanctitatis consolatrix dilectio animam meam vestra tam longa, tam taediosa absentia graviter fore turbatam. Vestri etenim reditus optati terminus, quanto celerior et propinquior a pluribus mihi promittitur, tanto magis a me, vestra frui optante praesentia et locutione, desideratur. Nullo itaque, reverentissime domine, perfecto gaudio anima mea laetificabitur, nulla vera dilectione exhilarabitur, quo usque vestram, quam totis mentis meae viribus desidero, praesentiam revidere gaudenter valeam. Vestrae siquidem benignitatis mellifluam exoro dulcedinem, ut interim me absentem vestrae amoenitate correptionis et litterarum vestrarum dulcedine consolari et laetificare dignemini.
Omnipotens et pius dominus vos ubique conservet, et de reditu vestro me ad praesens laetificet. Amen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Anxiously awaiting Anselm's return, the queen asks him to keep writing to her.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) Anselm had left England on 27 April 1103.
(2) The news of Pope Paschal's assent to King Henry's suggested compromise at l'Aigle may have already reached England, see HN 181-183; Epp 387, 397.
(3) The translation is reproduced with the permission of the translator and the publisher, Cistercian Publications Inc. Editorial Offices, Institute of Cistercian Studies, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008.  All rights are reserved; downloading and copying for any purpose other than private research is prohibited.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Anselmi Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Opera Omnia,</em> ed. F.S. Schmitt (Edinburgh: T. Nelson, 1946-63), ep.395, 5.339; translation, <em>The Letters of Saint Anselm of Canterbury,</em> trans. Walter Fröhlich, Cistercian Studies 142, 3v (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1990-94), 3.155.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>5/ or 6/1106