---
letter_id: "24121"
title: "A letter from Henry V, emperor (1106-09)"
ititle: "a letter from henry v, emperor (1106-09)"
ltr_date: "1106-09"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-07"
url: "/letter/414.html"
senders:
  - id: 21387
    name: Henry V, emperor
    iname: henry v, emperor
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 64
    name: Matilda of Scotland, queen of the English
    iname: matilda of scotland, queen of the english
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Henry, by the grace of God king of the Romans, to Matilda, queen of the English, greetings and every good.
As we have learned from many, we owe great thanks to your goodness and great proof of friendship, because our honor and love is very precious in your mouth and heart, and you have spoken well of us often, publicly and privately, to your lord and to all who listen to you.  For which, with God willing and granting life, we will not be unmindful.  And we will respond worthily to your benevolence in all things, as our honor/position demands.  If, therefore, there is anything in the kingdom or in our power that is worthy for you to desire, you may believe that we neither wish nor are we able to deny it to you.  Wherefore, now persevere attentively in that benevolence which you have always had towards us, so that in all things with which we charge your lord, we may know by experience your zeal.
May your count N. feel that he has offended not only us, but also you and your lord, who dared to impede our messengers whom we sent to you both.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Henricus Dei gratia Romanorum rex M(athildae) reginae Anglorum salutem et omne bonum.
Sicut nonnullorum relatione didicimus, multas grates bonitati tuae, multa debemus argumenta amiciciae;  eo quod in ore et corde tuo preciosus sit honor et dilectio nostra, et quia tam apud dominum tuum quam apud omnes tibi auscultantes in bonum sepe de nobis publice et privatim es locuta.  Cuius rei quandoque, Deo volente et vitam tribuente, non immemores erimus; et benivolentiae tuae, prout honor noster exigit, condigne per omnia respondebimus.  Si quid ergo est in regno aut in facultatibus nostris, quod dignum te sit affectare, nullatenus id credas nos velle aut posse tibi negare.  Et nunc igitur in ea, quam semper erga nos habuisti, benivolentia attentius persevera;  ut in his omnibus, quae domino tuo mandamus, studium tuum experimento cognoscamus.
Sentias comes tuus N., non solum nos sed etiam te et dominum tuum offendisse;  qui nuntios nostros impedire ausus est, quos misimus vobis utrique.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The emperor, who married Matilda’s daughter Matilda in 1110, thanks the queen for her good will and help and asks her to maintain them.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Bibliotheca Rerum Germanicarum</em>, 5 <em>Monumenta Bambergensis</em>, ed. Philipp Jaffé, Udalrici Codex ep.142, p.259</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1106-09