---
letter_id: "24124"
title: "A letter from Hildebert, bishop of Lavardin (c.1100-18)"
ititle: "a letter from hildebert, bishop of lavardin (c.1100-18)"
ltr_date: "c.1100-18"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/417.html"
senders:
  - id: 21400
    name: Hildebert, bishop of Lavardin
    iname: hildebert, bishop of lavardin
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 64
    name: Matilda of Scotland, queen of the English
    iname: matilda of scotland, queen of the english
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Humble minister of LeMans, Hildebert, to Matilda, venerable queen of the English, to stand at the right hand of one at whose right the queen assists in gold and varied vestment.
I heard from the bearer of the presents that you are well in health and deigned to greet me; I am joyful about the first, from the second my name and glory are full.  For I am convicted of sin by law and the church unless my spirit can rejoice and exult in the health of one whose health preserves reverence of laws and the status of the church unimpaired.  For nothing is more fitting to make a Christian soul rejoice than the health of those by whom the integrity of laws and the status of the church is preserved unimpaired.  I rejoice therefore and I shall rejoice as long as the breeze announces to my ears that you are safe, as long as I hear that you live and thrive as queen, on whom the power to judge crime and the behavior to be an exemplar of honesty is conferred.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Humilis Cenomanorum minister HILDEBERTUS, MATHILDI venerabili Anglorum reginae, ad illius stare dexteram, a cujus dextris astitit regina in vestitu deaurato circumdata varietate.
Audita per praesentium latorem, et salute qua incolumis es, et salutatione qua me dignata es, de primo quidem gaudium subortum est, de secundo vero nomen mihi et gloria exuberant. In leges enim et in Ecclesiam peccare convincor, nisi de salute laetetur et exsultet spiritus meus, cujus incolumitas et legum reverentiam, et Ecclesiae statum servat incolumen. Nihil enim est unde magis oporteat laetari animam Christianam, quam super eorum incolumitate, quibus et legum integritas, et Ecclesiae status incolumis perseverat. Gaudeo igitur, sed et gaudebo, quoties meas aures aura, quae te sospitem nuntiet, afflaverit, quoties audiam vivere reginam et valere, cui et potestas collata est ad judicium sceleris, et mores ad exemplar honestatis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Hildebert rejoices in reports of the queen’s good health and connects her continued health with the health of the church and the nation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>PL171 ep.3.11 c289-90
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1100-18