---
letter_id: "24125"
title: "A letter from Hildebert, bishop of Lavardin (c.1108-18)"
ititle: "a letter from hildebert, bishop of lavardin (c.1108-18)"
ltr_date: "c.1108-18"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/418.html"
senders:
  - id: 21400
    name: Hildebert, bishop of Lavardin
    iname: hildebert, bishop of lavardin
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 64
    name: Matilda of Scotland, queen of the English
    iname: matilda of scotland, queen of the english
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Holy love ignores the discomforts of time or place.  Affection rules it, which is always its own law, prejudiced by no alien force.  It is always permitted to love, even if it is not permitted to see the one you love.  So, though I am separated from you by land and sea, I love you in Christ, and mention you there where honorable thought is promised reward and illict thought, punishment.  To the altar of the Lord, indeed, your memory accompanies me, fearing lest it bring down judgment on me if I defraud you of that intervention which you, o queen, bought with your favors/gifts.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Locorum vel temporis incommoda sanctus amor ignorat. Affectus in eo principatur, qui semper sui juris est, nec ei vis praejudicat aliena. Omni siquidem tempore licet diligere, etsi, quem diligis, videre non liceat. Hinc est quod mari ac terra separatus a te, in Christo diligo te, illuc mentionem tui deferens, ubi et honesta cogitatio praemium, et illicita supplicium promeretur. Ad altare quippe Domini tua me comitatur memoria, timentem, ne mihi cedat ad judicium, si eo interventu te defraudo, quem beneficiis, regina, comparasti.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Hildebert assures the queen of his love and prayers for her.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>PL171 ep.3.12, c290
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1108-18