---
letter_id: "23752"
title: "A letter from Gregory I, pope (11/-12/598)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory i, pope (11/-12/598)"
ltr_date: "11/-12/598"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-14"
url: "/letter/42.html"
senders:
  - id: 21362
    name: Gregory I, pope
    iname: gregory i, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21362.html
receivers:
  - id: 14
    name: Theodelind, queen of the Lombards
    iname: theodelind, queen of the lombards
    type: woman
    url: /woman/14.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory to Theodelind, queen of the Lombards.
We have learned from the report of our son abbot Probus that your excellency has devoted yourself as is your custom to making peace, with zeal and benevolence.  Nor would we have expected other from your christianity than that you would show your labor and goodness in the cause of peace in every way.  For which we thank almighty God who so rules your heart with piety for him that he has given you the right faith and granted that you always do what is pleasing to him.  Do not believe, excellent daughter, that you have acquired small mercy for the blood which would [otherwise] have been shed on both sides.  Giving thanks for your good will in this, we pray God's mercy that he reward you in turn with goods for the body and soul here and in the future.
Greeting you, furthermore, with paternal love, we urge that you act towards your most excellent spouse so that he does not deny the association/alliance with the christian republic.  For as we believe you know, it would be useful in many way if he wished to commit himself to its friendship.  You therefore, according to your custom, be zealous always to do what pertains to the good of the parties, labor where the cause of mercy demands, that you may commend your good even more to the eyes of almighty God.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Gregorius Theodelindae Reginae Langobardorum
Quia excellentia vestra ad faciendum se pacem studiosius et benigne, sicut solet, impenderit, renuntiante filio nostro Probo abbate cognovimus. Nec enim aliter de christianitate vestra fuerat confidendum, nisi quia in causa pacis laborem et bonitatem vestram modis omnibus monstraretis. Unde omnipotenti Deo gratias agimus, qui ita cor vestrum sua pietate regit, ut, sicut fidem rectam tribuit, ita quoque placita sibi vos semper operari concedat. Non enim, excellentissima filia, de sanguine qui ab utraque parte fundendus fuerat parvam te credas adquisisse mercedem. Ex qua re voluntati vestrae gratias referentes Dei nostri misericordiam deprecamur, ut bonorum vobis vicem in corpore et anima hic et in futuro compenset.
Salutantes praeterea paterna dilectione hortamur, ut apud excellentissimum coniugem vestrum illa agatis, quatenus christianae reipublicae societatem non rennuat. Nam sicut et vos scire credimus, multis modis est utile, si se ad eius amicitias conferre voluerit. Vos ergo more vestro, quae ad gratiam partium pertinent, semper studete atque, ubi causa mercedis se dederit, laborate, ut bona vestra amplius ante omnipotentis Dei oculos commendetis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Gregory thanks the queen for her work in the cause of peace and encourages her to keep her husband from renouncing his alliance with the Christian republic (the papal state). Paul the Deacon cites this letter in his<em> History of the Lombards</em>, 4.9, along with a letter to the king, Agilulf, thanking him for ordering the peace, saying he shows by loving peace that he loves God, since otherwise the blood of poor rural areas would have been shed with sin and danger, areas whose labor is of use to both of us, and asks him to announce the peace to his dukes by letter (9.66).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH <em>Greg I Reg,</em> 9.67, 2.87-88 dated November-December, 598.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>11/-12/598