---
letter_id: "24128"
title: "A letter from Marbod, bishop of Rennes ()"
ititle: "a letter from marbod, bishop of rennes ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-15"
url: "/letter/421.html"
senders:
  - id: 21462
    name: Marbod, bishop of Rennes
    iname: marbod, bishop of rennes
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 64
    name: Matilda of Scotland, queen of the English
    iname: matilda of scotland, queen of the english
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>It is the value of this work to have attempted the dangers of the sea,
to have feared the threats of a dubious fate.
It helps to have seen a queen to whom none
can be compared in beauty of body and face.
Though she alone hides it under a loose dress,
desiring to disguise it with unusual modesty,
she can not hide it because it shines with its own light
and the sun piercing the clouds sets the rays in motion.
Outstanding customs and words flowing with honey.
It is better to be silent than to speak too little of it.
Other women affect what nature denied them,
paint their purple cheeks with snowy milk.
The embalmed face draws together painted colors,
distinguishing signs by the adultery of art.
In some, bands compress the projecting breasts
and a draped dress suggests a long flank.
They partly uncover their hair with an extended [plucked?] forehead
and wish to please with iron-wrought curls.
You, o queen, fear to seem beautiful, because you are,
having gifts freely which others purchase.
It is better to have openly what nature blessed you with,
you would be ungrateful to God if you denied his gifts,
you wish to hide your lighted lantern under a bushel,
it is not yours, but the gifts of a giving Lord that you have.
A virgin, though modest, may yet look beautiful
and a lovely form suit a chaste mind.
O royal spouse born from royal forebears!
Great things can not be covered, small usually lie hidden.
Your fame will live as long as my songs live,
and he who reads my writings will sing of you.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Est operae pretium tentasse pericula Ponti,
   Et dubiae sortis pertimuisse minas.
Reginam vidisse juvat, quam nulla decore
   Corporis ac vultus aequiparare queat.
Quem tamen occultans laxae velamine vestis
   Sola pudore novo dissimulare cupit
Sed nequit abscondi propria quod luce coruscat,
   Et vibrat radios nubila sol penetrans.
Egregios mores, ac melle fluentia verba.
   Plus reticere juvat, quam minus inde loqui.
Affectant aliae quod eis natura negavit,
   Purpureas niveo pingere lacte genas;
Fucatosque trahit facies medicata colores,
   Distinguendo notas artis adulterio.
Comprimit exstantes quarumdam fascia mammas,
   Et longum fingit vestis adacta latus.
Hae partim retegunt laxosa fronte capillos,
   Et calamistrato crine placere volunt.
Tu, regina, quod es, metuis formosa videri,
   Quae coemunt aliae munera gratis habens.
Praestat habere palam quo te natura beavit,
   Sis ingrata Deo si sua dona neges.
Accensam modio vis occultare lucernam,
   Non tua, sed Domini munera dantis habes.
Virgo, pudica licet, tamen optat pulchra videri,
   Et castam mentem candida forma decet.
O regis conjux proavis ex regibus orta!
   Magna tegi nequeunt, parva latere solent.
Vivet fama tui quantum mea carmina vivent,
   Et te cantabit, qui mea scripta leget.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Marbod praises the queen by disparaging other women.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>PL171 c1660
