---
letter_id: "24141"
title: "A letter from Ingeborg of Denmark, queen of France (bet. 1200-1213?)"
ititle: "a letter from ingeborg of denmark, queen of france (bet. 1200-1213?)"
ltr_date: "bet. 1200-1213?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/434.html"
senders:
  - id: 68
    name: Ingeborg of Denmark, queen of France
    iname: ingeborg of denmark, queen of france
    type: woman
    url: /woman/68.html
receivers:
  - id: 21306
    name: dean of Amiens
    iname: dean of amiens
    type: people
    url: /people/21306.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To my beloved friends in Christ, the dean and chapter of Amiens, Ingeburg, by the grace of God humble queen of the French, greetings in the Lord.
We believe it is not unknown to you what is known to all the world, how many discomforts we suffered after we received the anointing of royal dignity and the crown.  Because of that we have been prevented for such a long interval of time and unable to honor with a gift as we would have wished your church, to which we are endebted by special and owed devotion because we received the fullness of our honor and position in it, albeit with sorrowful omen.
Now however we have sent a chasuble, beseeching that you include us in your prayers and by the contemplation of love and devotion which we bear and wish especially to bear to you and your church that you make us participants in its offices and benefices.  You should know for certain that, if the Lord should increase his grace to us and restore us to peace, we will make our love manifest to you and your church by more certain signs and indications.  Though the chasuble which we have sent may not be very precious by estimation or appearance, yet we desire to obtain from you that you have solemn masses celebrated in it for the feast of the blessed Virgin.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilectis in Christo amicis, decano et capitulo Ambianensi, Ingeburgis, Dei gratia Francorum Regina humilis, in Domino salutem. Incognitum vobis esse non credimus, quod pene toti notum est orbi, quanta perpessae sumus incommoda postquam regiae dignitatis unctionem adeptae sumus pariter et coronam, propter quae tanto temporis interstitio sumus praepeditae ut ecclesiam vestram, cui ex eo speciali debito et devotione sumus obnoxiae quod in ea, licet flebili auspicio, plenitudinem tamen honoris nostri et dignitatis suscepimus, prout voluimus, nondum valuimus muneris obsequio honorare. Nunc autem ei planetam unam transmittimus, supplicantes ut in orationibus vestris nos colligatis, et intuitu dilectionis et devotionis quam ad vos et ecclesiam vestram gerimus et specialiter gerere volumus, officiorum et beneficiorum quae in ea fiunt nos participes faciatis: scituri pro certo quod, si Dominus gratiam suam nobis adauxerit et pacem nobis reddiderit, nos dilectionem nostram erga vos et ecclesiam vestram manifestabimus certioribus signis et indiciis. Licet vero capsula quam vobis mittimus, non sit quantum ad aestimationem sen apparentiam multum pretiosa, obtinere tamen apud vos cupimus ut in beatae Virginis solemnitatibus solemnia missarum in ea celebrare faciatis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The queen sends a gift to the cathedral of Amiens, where she was married, with apologies that she was not able to do so before.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF19, Epistolae Sancti Guillelmi Abbatis S. Thomae de Paracleto 22, p322
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>bet. 1200-1213?