---
letter_id: "24146"
title: "A letter from Gervasius, Premonstratensian abbot (?)"
ititle: "a letter from gervasius, premonstratensian abbot (?)"
ltr_date: "?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/439.html"
senders:
  - id: 21358
    name: Gervasius, Premonstratensian abbot
    iname: gervasius, premonstratensian abbot
    type: people
    url: /people/21358.html
receivers:
  - id: 68
    name: Ingeborg of Denmark, queen of France
    iname: ingeborg of denmark, queen of france
    type: woman
    url: /woman/68.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the illustrious and most beloved lady Ingeborg, by the grace of God queen of the French, Gervasius, called Premonstratensian abbot by the providence of God, and the general chapter of his order, greetings and devout will to service with prayers.
Though we embrace all religious persons sincerely and devotedly, yet we believe that you are moved by a certain spiritual affection for the Premonstratensian order, which was excited in you more by your zeal, we believe, than by anything that derived from our merits.  Since we are bound closely to all who show themselves favorable and devoted to us, we wish and ought to be the more obedient to you, as your love has been/will be very fruitful to us.  You asked that we take care to renew our prayers, long given to you, in new letters, since the earlier letters may not have been kept with fitting diligence.  We are prepared to obey you, not only in what you ask, but also in whatever we can, whatever is pleasing or acceptable to your devotion, so we have renewed by the present letters [your] participation in prayers and all spiritual benefices which will be perpetually in our order, according to what was granted you some years ago, adding that when notice of your death reaches our chapter general, by the witness of the present letters, as much will be done for you as is customary for anyone of ours in masses, prayers, and psalms.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>ILLUSTRI et amantissimae dominae Ingeb., Dei gratia Reginae Francorum, Gervasius, Dei providentia Praemonstrati dictus abbas, et ejusdem ordinis capitulum generale, salutem et cum orationibus devotam ad obsequia voluntatem. LICET religiosas omnes personas sincere amplectamini ac devote, credimus tamen quod spirituali quadam affectione moveamini erga ordinem Praemonstrati, quam potius excitavit in vobis, ut credimus, zelus vester quam aliud quod ex meritis nostris emanaret. Cum igitur omnibus teneamur astricti, qui se nobis propitios exhibent ac devotos, tanto magis vobis esse volumus et debemus obnoxii, quanto magis vestra dilectio nobis esse poterit amplius fructuosa. Sane petiistis ut orationes nostras, dudum vobis concessas, curaremus per novas literas innovare; quia forte priores literae non fuerunt ea qua deceret diligentia custoditae. Nos autem, parati vobis obsequi, non solum in hoc quod petitis, verum etiam in omni eo qnod nos possemus et vestra gratum haberet devotio vel acceptum, participationem orationum et omnium spiritualium beneficiorum quae perpetuo fient in ordine nostro, secundum quod vobis ante annos aliquot est concessum, praesentibus literis duximus innovandum: addentes quod, cun obitus vestri dies innotuerit nostro capitulo generali, sub praesentium testimonio literarum tantum fiet pro vobis quantum pro quolibet uno nostrum fieri consuevit in missis, orationibus, et in psalmis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The abbot assures the queen of his order’s devotion to her because of her devotion to them and of their continued prayers for her.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>HGF19, Epistolae Sancti Guillelmi Abbatis S. Thomae de Paracleto 24, p323 and <em>Sacrae Antiquitatis Monumenta, Historica Dogmatica</em>, Diplomatica, 1, ep.51, p49; same text with one slight change in word order, one magis omitted.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>?