---
letter_id: "24148"
title: "A letter from Innocent III, pope (1205)"
ititle: "a letter from innocent iii, pope (1205)"
ltr_date: "1205"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/441.html"
senders:
  - id: 21420
    name: Innocent III, pope
    iname: innocent iii, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21420.html
receivers:
  - id: 68
    name: Ingeborg of Denmark, queen of France
    iname: ingeborg of denmark, queen of france
    type: woman
    url: /woman/68.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the queen of the French.
He knows, to whom nothing in not known, that on the article of matrimony we have done for you whatever man could do but, sins prevailing, we accomplished little since the soul of our dearest son in Christ, Philip illustrious king of the French, could not be inclined to any degree to show you marital affection, nor can we inspire love in his soul, since only God can do that, in whose hand the king’s heart lies.  The king thinks, and many are of the same opinion, that he is impeded by perpetual maleficence.  Wherefore he asks to be separated from you not only because of affinity but also because of maleficence.  Therefore though we do not want to fail you, but wish always to support you as much as we can with God, yet since we cannot change the disposition of God, nor is it useful that you and the king remain longer in this miserable state, we send you our beloved son, our chaplain master P, a prudent and faithful man, to give you the comfort of our visit and subtlely uncover your mind.  To him you can safely reveal your will to be conveyed faithfully to us so that, knowing it, we can better provide for you.
Given at Rome, St. Peters, 3rd nones of July.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Novit ille, qui nihil ignorat, quod super articulo matrimonii pro te fecimus quidquid homo facere potuit, sed, peccatis exigentibus, parum profecimus, quoniam ad exhibendum tibi maritalem affectum, animus charissimi in Christo filii nostri, Philippi, regis Francorum illustris, non potest aliquatenus inclinari, neque nos ejus animo amorem possumus inspirare, cum hoc solus Deus facere possit, in cujus manu cor regis existit. Putat igitur ipse rex et multi etiam opinantur, quod perpetuo sit maleficio impeditus. Unde, non solum propter affinitatem, verum etiam propter maleficium a te postulat separari. Licet igitur tibi deesse nolimus, imo, quantum cum Deo possumus, semper velimus adesse, quia tamen dispositionem Dei mutare non possumus, nec expedit, ut in hoc miserabili statu tu, et rex ipse, diutius maneatis, mittimus ad te dilectum filium, magistrum P. capellanum nostrum, virum providum et fidelem, qui tibi solatium nostrae visitationis impendat et animum tuum subtiliter investiget, cui secure tuam aperias voluntatem nobis fideliter intimandam, ut, ea cognita, melius tibi providero possimus.
Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum, III Nonas Julii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>By this point, the pope who had written strong letters to the king (see ep.6.86, 6.182) but also tried to accomodate him in their negotiations, seems to have been worn down by Philip and been forced to accept maleficence as the alleged cause of incompatibility.  He offers only spiritual comfort to the queen, though he did not in fact give up her cause.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>PL215 ep.8.113, c.680, HGF19, p.478, and Raynaldi Annales Ecclesiastici, 20, p.227-28, same text
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1205