---
letter_id: "24151"
title: "A letter from Honorius III, pope (1226)"
ititle: "a letter from honorius iii, pope (1226)"
ltr_date: "1226"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-08"
url: "/letter/444.html"
senders:
  - id: 21404
    name: Honorius III, pope
    iname: honorius iii, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21404.html
receivers:
  - id: 68
    name: Ingeborg of Denmark, queen of France
    iname: ingeborg of denmark, queen of france
    type: woman
    url: /woman/68.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Honorius bishop . . ., to his dearest daughter in Christ I[ngeborg], once illustrious queen of the French, widow of Philip king of France of renowned memory, greetings etc.
Though the benignity of the apostolic see, which we preside over by authority of the Lord, opens its organs of piety to all as universal mother, it does not bestow equal affection on all, but loves and honors with greater preference those it finds more forthcoming in their devotion.  Thus it is that noting the devotion which you are known to have to the holy Roman church your mother and to us, beyond the common duty of the pastoral office by which we are compelled to the care and sollicitude of widows, showing special grace to you, we take under protection your person with all the goods which you formally possess now or in the future,(1) strictly forbidding anyone to promulgate sentences of excommunication or interdiction against you or your land without manifest and reasonable canonical cause, even with forewarning, unless there should have been such excess as does not require judiciary order.  We bestow these on you with the authority of the presents so that, if you feel yourself oppressed in anything, you are free to appeal to the apostolic see.  Let it be permitted to no one to violate this page of our protection, inhibition and concession, etc.
Given at the Lateran, 14th kalends of March, tenth year.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>HONORIUS episcopus. . . . , carissimae in Christo filiae I. quondam Reginae Francorum illustri, relictae inclytae memorie Ph. Regis Franciae, salutem etc. Licet apostolicae sedis benignitas, cui auctore Domino praesidemus, tamquam universalis mater omnibus aperiat viscera pietatis, non tamen aequali affectione prosequitur universos, sed illos majori praerogativa diligit et honorat, quos in devotione reperit promptiores. Hinc est quod, devotionem quam ad sacrosanctam Romanam ecclesiam matrem tuam et nos ipsos habere dignosceris attendentes, praeter commune debitum officii pastoralis, quo curam et sollicitudinem gerere cogimur viduarum, specialem tibi gratiam exhibentes, personam tuam cum omnibus bonis quae impraesentiarum rationabiliter possides aut in futurum, etc. (usque communimus), districtius inhibentes ne quis in te vel terram tuam, sine manifesta et rationabili causa canonica, etiam monitione praemissa, excommunicationis vel interdicti praesumat sententias promulgare, ni forte fuerit talis excessus qui ordinem judiciarium non requirat. Ad haec auctoritate tibi praesentium indulgemus ut, si te senseris in aliquo praegravari, libere tibi liceat ad sedem apostolicam appellare. Nulli ergo liceat hanc paginam nostrae protectionis, inhibitionis et concessionis infringere etc.
Datum Laterani, xiv kal. martii, anno decimo.
Ad ROMANUM ,   Sancti-Angeli cardinalem, A. S.  Legatu
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Honorius takes Ingeborg under the protection of the papacy and the church.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) At this point the document listed the dowry lands of the queen, which are printed in HGF19, Epistolae Sancti Guillelmi Abbatis S. Thomae de Paracleto, ep.25, p.324.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF19, Epistolarum Honorii Pape III, Liber X, ep.10.217, p.771
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1226