---
letter_id: "23755"
title: "A letter from Gerbert of Aurillac (1/984-2/984)"
ititle: "a letter from gerbert of aurillac (1/984-2/984)"
ltr_date: "1/984-2/984"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/45.html"
senders:
  - id: 21349
    name: Gerbert of Aurillac
    iname: gerbert of aurillac
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 8
    name: Imiza, a lady of the Ottonian court
    iname: imiza, a lady of the ottonian court
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I judge myself fortunate in the acquaintance and friendship of such a woman, whose firm faith and enduring constancy my Gauls are not sufficient to admire.  And though your prudence does not need advice, yet since we perceive that you collaborate and condole in our misfortune, we wish to join our letters and messengers to the lord pope with yours.  If we have patrons and helpers of our own or in common, as we sorrow at the same time, we may, with the divinity propitious, rejoice at the same time.  Greet my lady empress Theophanu in my name.  Tell her that the kings of the Franks [Lothar and Louis V] favor her son and attempt nothing but to weaken the tyranny of Henry [duke of Bavaria] who wishes to make himself king in the name of willing advocacy.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Felicem me iudico tante femine agnitione et amititia. Cuius fidem firmam, constantiam longevam admirari non sufficiunt Galli mei. Et quamvis vestra prudentia non egeat ammonitione, tamen, quia vos conlaborantes et condolentes nostro infortunio sentimus, domnum papam conveniri nuntiis et epistolis vestris ac nostris volumus, et si quos vel spetialiter vele in commune, habemus fautores et adiutores, ut, qui simul tristamur, propitia divinitate simul gaudeamus. Dominam meam Theuphanu imperatricem meo nomine convenite. Reges Francorum filio suo favere dicite nichilque aliud conari nisi tyrannide Heinrici velle regem se facere volentis sub nomine advocationis destruere.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope mentioned in the letter is John XIV, to whom Gerbert had complained about his perilous situation in ep.14.  Gerbert was deeply involved in French and imperial politics, an early supporter of Hugh Capet, while Lothar was still king, and of Theophanu as regent.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)The duke of Bavaria, Henry the Wrangler, a cousin of Otto II, took charge of Theophanu’s son Otto III when his father died.  Young Otto was three years old and his mother was unable to return from Italy for several months.  But she and the child’s grandmother Adelaide successfully contested Henry for the regency.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH BDKz 2 ep.22 p.44-45, dated early 984; also HGF9 ep.24 p.279-80 and PL139 ep.22 c207 (a few minor variations in word order or spelling).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1/984-2/984