---
letter_id: "24158"
title: "A letter from Adam Marsh (after 1246)"
ititle: "a letter from adam marsh (after 1246)"
ltr_date: "after 1246"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-13"
url: "/letter/451.html"
senders:
  - id: 21199
    name: Adam Marsh
    iname: adam marsh
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 70
    name: Sanchia of Provence
    iname: sanchia of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the illustrious lady, S[anchia], countess of Cornwall, Brother Adam [sends] peace and greetings on earth, glory and honor in heaven.
Because the most serene eminence of your ladyship ordered the state and will of my humble person to be made known to her, I swell with thanks as much as I can, though not as much as I want, praying that what my insufficiency can not, the supernal affluence of highest majesty in you may satisfy, for the multiple generosity of both benefits and honors so frequently shown to me by the innate liberality of your benevolence.  Let there be blessing therefore in the divine Name.
I spend my days with my brothers at Oxford, supported in bodily welfare, giving devoted promptness to [serve] the honorable pleasure of your serenity.  Your excellency should know that our dearest brother William Batale is in the convent of minor brothers at Northampton on the order of our superiors, until they have assessed what should be done about him, according to the observances of our religion/order.
May your illustrious lord count thrive.  May the prosperity of your nobility thrive.  May your distinguished children thrive.  May your universal house thrive.  May all those serving you with faithful desire thrive in Jesus Christ and the most blessed Virgin.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2><p class="Bodytext41">Illustri dominae S., comitissae Cornubiae, Frater Ada pacem et salutem in terris, et in coelis gloriam et honorem.</p><p>Pro eo quod exilitatis meae statum et voluntem sibi praecepit insinuari serenissima vestrae dominationis eminentia, licet non ad quantas volo, ad quantas tamen valeo assurgo gratiarum actiones, obsecrans ut quod mea nequit insufficientia superna vobis satisfaciat summae majestatis affluentia, pro multiplici beneficiorum pariter et honorum largitione mihi per innatam benevolentiae vestrae liberalitatem frequentius exhibita. Igitur sit benedictio divino Nomini. Oxoniae cum fratribus ibidem degentibus dies ago in praesentiarum, corporali sospitate subnixus, ad honorabile serenitatis vestrae beneplacitum devotam in Domino gerens promptitudinem. Caeterum vestra noverit excellentia carissimum fratrem Willielmum Batale in conventu fratrum minorum Northamptonae de ordinatione superiorum nostrorum, quousque ipsi aliiud de ipso statuendum censuerint, secundum religionis nostrae observantias consistere.</p><p class="Bodytext51">Valeat inclytus comes dominus vester. Valeat et nobilitatis vestrae prosperitas. Valeant et insignes liberi vestri. Valeat et universa domus vestra. Valeant et cuncti profectus vestros fideli desiderio prosequentes in Christo Jesu semper et beatissima Virgine.</p><p class="Bodytext41">&nbsp;</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The queen had requested that a Franciscan, William Batale, attend her, according to a letter from Adam to a superior, asking him to allow William to go, ep.185, p.332.  Eleanor's letter is either not extant, or the request, made for the second time in ep.154, p.290-91 is repeated without naming the person.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Adae de Marisco Epistolae</em>, ed. J.S. Brewer (London: Longman et al, 1858), RBMAS, CM,<em> Monumenta Franciscana</em> II, ep.156, p.292</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 1246