---
letter_id: "23756"
title: "A letter from Marie of Boulogne and Blois (1168, January 1 (or 1165))"
ititle: "a letter from marie of boulogne and blois (1168, january 1 (or 1165))"
ltr_date: "1168, January 1 (or 1165)"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/46.html"
senders:
  - id: 15
    name: Marie of Boulogne and Blois
    iname: marie of boulogne and blois
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21455
    name: Louis VII, King of France
    iname: louis vii, king of france
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To her reverend lord Louis, king of the French, M[arie], countess of Boulogne, greetings and service.
Let it be known to your presence that Henry, king of England, has sent his messengers to the emperor.  He usually gets what he wants. The Emperor has shown himself benevolent to the king up to now so he did not delay sending his messengers back to him, which he thought best to do lest the said king doubt that he was devoted in his support against you.  The messengers crossed through my land on their way back and I spoke to them and understood from their words that the king of England does not cease to seek your harm night and day.  For that reason I held it fitting to send to your love and thought it necessary to warn you to take counsel with your wise [advisors] and do what is considered most appropriate, so the impetuous presumption of that fraudulent king does not do violent harm to you.
Fare well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Reverendo domino suo Ludovico, Regi Francornm M.  Comitissa Boloniae, salutem et servitium. Praesentiae vestrae innotescat, Henricum Regem Angliae ad Imperatorem suos nuncios legasse. Certum enim est illum communiter impetrasse quod voluit. Imperator autem se adeo Regi exhibuit benivolum, ut cum nunciis suis redeuntibus suos ad eum mittere non pigritatus sit: quod fecisse duxit optimum, ne praedictus Rex illum adversus vos in subsidio esse devotum dubitaret. Nuncii equidem redeuntes per meam terram transierunt, et ego eis locuta fui, et bene ex verbis eorum attendi quod Rex Angliae malum vestrum perquirere nocte dieque non cessat. Quare dilectioni vestrae mandare duxi congruum, et vos praemunire attendi necessarium, ut consilium cum vestris sapientibus ineatis, et quod aptius invenietur faciatis, ne fraudulenti Regis impetuosa praesumptio vobis molestiam violenter conferat. Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Marie warns Louis about the intentions of Henry II, her second cousin and successful rival for the English crown over her brother William. Anne J. Duggan suggests that the letter might have been written in 1165, apropos the mission to Wurzburg, <em>The Correspondence of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1162-70</em> (Oxford: Clarendon, 2000) v.1.543, ep.112, n.9.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF 16 ep.437, p.144, which dates it 1168
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1168, January 1 (or 1165)