---
letter_id: "24194"
title: "A letter from Henry III (1/1/1257)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii (1/1/1257)"
ltr_date: "1/1/1257"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-08"
url: "/letter/487.html"
senders:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 69
    name: Beatrice of Savoy
    iname: beatrice of savoy
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The king to the countess of Provence, greeting.
You should know that we accept and are pleased by the form of peace arranged, ordered, and confirmed between you and Charles, count of Provence, by the illustrious king of France on the matter of the counties of Provence and Forcalquier and the march/ marquisate of Provence.
Except for the right which pertains to us and our beloved consort A.[Eleanor] our queen, and also our brother Richard, count of Cornwall, and countess S. [Sanchia], his wife, in said counties and march.
In witness, the King, at Merton, first day of January.
[summary in Patent Rolls:  Notification to the countess of Provence that the king has accepted the form of peace made between her and Charles, count of Provence and by the award of the king of France, in the matter of the counties of Provence and Forquarquier and the marchionate of Provence; saving the right of king, E. the queen and R. earl of Cornwall, the king's brother, and S. his countess, therein.  {[Foedera}]
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Rex Comitissae Provinciae, salutem.
Sciatis quod formam pacis, inter vos, et Carolum Comitem Provinciae, per illustrem Regem Franciae provisam, ordinatam, et firmatam, super facto Comitatuum Provinciae, et Folqualquar. atque Marchionatus Provinciae, acceptamus et gratam habemus;
Salvo jure quod nobis, et dilectae consorti nostrae A. Reginae nostrae, necnon et Ricardo Comiti Cornubiae fratri nostro, et S. Comitissae uxori ejusdem, competit in Comitatibus et Marchionatu praedictis.
In cujus, etc.
Teste Rege apud Merton, primo die Januarii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Henry's letters patent accepting the terms of the agreement made by Louis between Charles of Anjou and Beatrice but reserving claims his wife, and he through her, and her sister Sanchia, and her husband, Henry's brother Richard, have in Provence and Forcalquier.  The letter is summarized in the Patent Rolls, 4.584; it is summarized again 4.538, dated Jan.18, 1257, and cancelled because "the letter was surrendered."
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.2.23 (3rd ed.)</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1/1/1257