---
letter_id: "23759"
title: "A letter from Gerbert of Aurillac (04/0985)"
ititle: "a letter from gerbert of aurillac (04/0985)"
ltr_date: "04/0985"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-15"
url: "/letter/49.html"
senders:
  - id: 21349
    name: Gerbert of Aurillac
    iname: gerbert of aurillac
    type: people
    url: /people/21349.html
receivers:
  - id: 17
    name: Matilda of Saxony, countess of Flanders and Verdun
    iname: matilda of saxony, countess of flanders and verdun
    type: woman
    url: /woman/17.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Let my lady Matilda put aside all complaints.  Your most splendid spouse Godfrey, outstanding among his peers and formidable in his victories, orders it.  Gladden your mind for a sad spirit dries up the bones and disturbs thoughts.  Keep your most pure faith to lady empress Theophanu, always august, and to her son, always august, with your sons,(1) make no pact with the Frank enemies, resist the kings of the Franks, hold all your castles, defend them so your enemies may have no part in them, at least neither in hope of freeing your husband nor in fear of the murder of him or your son Frederick.  He committed this to my faith on the 2nd kalends of April at the river Marne, which I have brought you with full faith.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Deponat domina mea Mathildis omnem querimoniam. Clarissimus vester coniunx Godefridus inter pares praecipuus ac ipsis victoribus formidabilis hoc praecipit. Exhilarate mentem, quia spiritus tristis exsiccat ossa, consilia turbat. Dominae Theophane imperatrici semper augustae ac filio eius semper augusto cum filiis vestris fidem purissimam servate, pactum cum Francis hostibus nullum facite, Francorum reges aversamini, castra omnia sic tenete, sic defendite, ut nullam in his habeant partem aversari vestri, scilicet neque pro spe liberationis mariti neque pro terrore peremptionis eius aut filii Friderici. Haec II kal. apr. ad flumen Matronam meae fidei commisit, quae vobis plena fide retuli.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>This is probably one of the letters Gerbert tells Theophanu he wrote for the imprisoned counts to their relatives (ep.52, <em>Epistolae</em> 163.html)). He conveys to Matilda her husband's desire that she defend his holdings no matter what threats are made against him.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)The sons, according to F. Weigle, editor of the letters, are Adalbero and Hermann, not themselves captives.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH BDKz 2 ep.50 p.79-80, dated April, 985; also HGF9 ep.33 p.283 and PL139 ep.50 c216 (same text except date, 11th rather 2nd kalends of April).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>04/0985