---
letter_id: "24203"
title: "A letter from Elias de Barjols (1219?)"
ititle: "a letter from elias de barjols (1219?)"
ltr_date: "1219?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-01"
url: "/letter/496.html"
senders:
  - id: 21320
    name: Elias de Barjols
    iname: elias de barjols
    type: people
    url: /people/21320.html
receivers:
  - id: 69
    name: Beatrice of Savoy
    iname: beatrice of savoy
    type: woman
    url: /woman/69.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I.  I might die, if I so wished,
in your power, love,
because you will never want to help me
in the situation you have placed me in;
for he is mad who does not turn away
from what he can not enjoy,
and he who thinks it [enjoyment] comes from suffering
is mad and follows his folly.

II.  From now on, I am not your prisoner,
because I can turn elsewhere,
and flee from the sighs and tears
and the ill favor
of your harsh lordship,
love, such that I am turning elsewhere;
and I am distressed at the departure
though it is not my fault.

III.  I am not altogether without blame,
for the beauty in whom there is merit
and real worth and true praise
I thought you would deign to [make] love me;
I had little sense that day!
but love, you made me choose her
and my eyes, so that I am angry at them
and will never again believe them.

IV.  Love, you were never any use
to your best friends,
but to the feigning deceivers
who lead to your decline
you give a wealth of joy,
love, and false mockery,
and you should not be pleased by
a false friend, man or woman.

V.  Love, since my good does not please you
your honor does not please me;
therefore, under constraint I make my complaint
and do not think I would remove myself
from you if good were to come to me;
but because it can not,
and I no longer have desire for it,
I remove myself and follow another road.

VI.  Valiant countess, wherever you are,
Beatrice, I can say truly
that you are the noblest lady that can be seen
and worth chooses you as the best.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>I.  Morir pogr'ieu, si'm volgues
e'l vostre poder, amors,
que ia no'm volgratz far socors
en tal loc m'aviatz mes;
per qu'es fols qui no's desvia
de so don no's pot iauzir,
e selh qu'o met en sufrir
es fols e sec sa folhia.

II.  Hueymay no suy vostre pres,
per que'm puesc virar alhors,
e fug a'ls sospirs et als plors
et a las malas merces
de vostra grieu senhoria,
amors, tan qu'alhors me vir;
e suy iratz del partir
si be'l colpa non es mia.

III.  Ses colpa no suy ieu ges,
qu'a la belh'on es valors
e fin prez e vera lauzors
cugey amar me degnes;
ben aigui pauc sen lo dia!
mas amors la'm fetz chauzir
e miey huelh per que'ls n'azir
e ia mais no'ls ne creyria.

IV.  Amors, anc pro non tengues
als vostres amics melhors,
mas als fenhens gualiadors
que vos meton en disses
donatz de joy manentia,
amors, e faus escarnir,
e ia no'us degr'abelhir
fals amics ni fals' amia.

V.  Amors, pus no'us plai mos bes
a mi no plai vostr'onors;
pero, forsatz en fas clamors
e no'us pessetz que'm tolgues
de vos, si bes m'en venia;
e quar no m'en pot venir
ni no'n ai mas lo dezir,
tuelhm'en e tenc autra via.

VI.  Pros comtessa, on que sia,
Biatritz, puesc per ver dir,
que'l genser dompn'es que's mir
e pretz per melhor vos tria.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Elias was at the court of Provence in the time of Raymond Berengar's father, Alfonso, and wrote poems for Raymond's mother countess Garsenda (#5-8), herself a poet, as well as for Beatrice (#10-13) and for Beatrice's mother, Margeurite (9).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Le Troubadour Elias de Barjols,</em> ed. Stanislas Stronski (Toulouse: Edouard Privat, 1906), 27-28, #11.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219?