---
letter_id: "24205"
title: "A letter from Elias de Barjols (1225-30)"
ititle: "a letter from elias de barjols (1225-30)"
ltr_date: "1225-30"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-01"
url: "/letter/498.html"
senders:
  - id: 21320
    name: Elias de Barjols
    iname: elias de barjols
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 69
    name: Beatrice of Savoy
    iname: beatrice of savoy
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I.  Love, it pleases me and seems good to me
that because of your base deeds,
lying and low,
all worthy people blame you;
because of your failure
everyone flees you and forgets you,
and for your foolish
and ugly behavior.

II.  Love, I have seen a time
when you were flower and grain!
now I see the most eminent
all have a bad opinion of you;
for it has done you harm
that to those who have obeyed you
you are a liar and unfaithful
and you serve those who do not serve.

III.  Love, I do not know a lord
even a young child
who would give two coins [Asti currency]
or serve you without reward;
because they have abandoned you
who served you a long time,
because there is less enjoyment
the more loyally one serves you.

IV.  Love, I tell you no,
for I am not in your hands,
. . . (1)
who puts himself in your prison;
and God keep me from such a life,
let it not be my destiny
to be obedient to you
or return to your torments.

V.  To the valiant king of Leon,
who is lord of Castile,
to whom I am a reliable friend
I send, if it please him, my song;
and if it is welcome to him,
it will be better sung and heard,
for he is beyond the most valiant,
generous, and charming, and pleasing.

VI.  . . . give life,
for . . .

VII.  Let her merit never forget me
the gracious countess,
Beatrice, nor her good sense
nor her lovely manner.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>I.  Amors, be'm platz e'm sap bo
quar per vostres faitz vilas
mensongiers e soteiras
vos mesprendon tug li pro;
tot per la vostra faillida
vos fui cascus e'us oblida
e pe'ls fols captenemens
que faitz tan dezavinens.

II.  Amors, ieu vi la sazo
que vos eratz flors e gras!
ar vei dels plus sobeiras
qe'n tenon tug mal resso;
c'aissi'us es enmalezida
q'a cels qi'us an obezida
es mensongeir' e volvens
e sirvetz los dessirvens.

III.  Amors, ieu no sai baro
tant sia ioves efas
que mezes dos astezas
ni'us servis ses guizardo;
per que cil vos aun gequida
qi'us an longuamen servida,
car meins n'a de iauzimens
qui plus vos ser lialmens.

IV.  Amors, aissi'us dic de no,
qu'ieu no soi en vostras mas
. . .
qui's met en vostra preizo;
e gart me Dieus d'aital vida,
que ia no'm si'escarida
qu'ieu vos si'obediens
ni'm torn e'ls vostres turmens.

V.  Al valen rei de Leo
qu'es senher dels Castellas
cui eu soi amicx sertas
tramet, si'll platz, ma chanso;
e si er per lui grazida
meils n'er cantad' et auzida
qu'el es sobre'ls plus valens
lars e adrei[z] e plazens.

VI.  . . . don vida
car au . . .
. . .
. . .

VII.  Ies sa valor(s) no'm oblida
de la comtessa grazida,
Biatris, ni sos bos senz
ni sos bels captenemenz.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Elias was at the court of Provence in the time of Raymond Berengar's father, Alfonso, and wrote poems for Raymond's mother countess Garsenda (#5-8), herself a poet, as well as for Beatrice (#10-13) and for Beatrice's mother, Margeurite (9).  The king of Leon from 1188 to 1230 was Alfonso IX, while his son Ferdinand was king of Castile, and would unite Leon with Castile when his father died in 1230.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)One manuscript gives "esparvier es de vilas," "you are a town-bred sparrow-hawk," that is, not much use, but Stronski rejects the line because of the rhyme, fn.27, p.101.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Le Troubadour Elias de Barjols</em>, ed. Stanislas Stronski (Toulouse: Edouard Privat, 1906), 32-34, #13.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1225-30