---
letter_id: "23715"
title: "A letter from Constance, countess of Toulouse (1163-1164)"
ititle: "a letter from constance, countess of toulouse (1163-1164)"
ltr_date: "1163-1164"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/5.html"
senders:
  - id: 3
    name: Constance of France, countess of Toulouse
    iname: constance of france, countess of toulouse
    type: woman
    url: /woman/3.html
receivers:
  - id: 21455
    name: Louis VII, King of France
    iname: louis vii, king of france
    type: people
    url: /people/21455.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To Louis, by the grace of God king of France, her venerable lord and dearest brother, Constance, his only sister, countess of Toulouse, duke of Narbonne, marquise of Province, greetings and happiness in both lives.
Be it known to your highness that Trencavel is being faithful to my lord count and your nephews and has poured out most fervent prayers to me over the freeing of his hostages.  For this cause I humbly implore, if I dare, your clemency as one in whom my whole hope is placed, that you deign to free them out of pity for my prayers and those of your nephews.  I call God to witness, if I knew anything useful to you in their captivity, I would never have spoken of their release for anyone's prayers.  If your mercy deigns to receive my prayers, charge Trencaval by letter that from now on he be more faithful to my lord count and your nephews than he has been and not permit them to help in wars or other matters.  Moreover I ask you diligently that you have Frederick, canon of St. Victor, come to me with the permission of his abbot.
Fare well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ludovico, Dei gratia Regi Franciae, venerabili domino et carissimo fratri suo, Constantia ejus unica soror, Comitissa Tolosae, Dux Narbonae, marchisa Provincae, salutem, et utriusque vita, felicitatem. Altitudini vestrae notum sit, Trincavellum erga dominum meum Comitem et nepotes vestros fideliter continere, et propter deliberationem suorum obsidum eum mihi ferventissimas preces infudisse. Hac de causa clementiam vestram, tamquam illius in quo tota mea spes est posita, si ausa sum, humiliter imploro, ut eos meis precibus et nepotum vestrorum pietate liberare dignemini. Testor Deum, si in eorum captione utilitatem vestram cognovissem, nunquam alicujus precibus de eorumdem solutione locuta fuissem. Si misercordia vestra preces meas suscipere dignata fuerit, Trincavello per literas vestras mandate, ut erga dominum meum Comitem et nepotes vestros fidelius quam solebat se deinceps habeat, et de guerris et caeteris negotiis eos juvare non permittat. Praeterea vos diligenter rogo, ut Fredericum, Sancti-Victoris canonicum, abbatis sui licentia ad me venire faciatis. Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Constance asks for the release of hostages taken from viscount Raymond Trencavel, who had supported Henry II against Louis and the count of Toulouse. Warren identifies him as Raymond Trencavel, viscount of Béziers and Carcassone, who had joined with Henry II in his expedition against Toulouse in 1159 (W.L. Warren, <em>Henry II</em> [Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1973], p.86); Devic and Vaissette call him the viscount of Nîmes, <em>Histoire Générale de Languedoc</em> (Toulouse: Privat, 1872), 3.841. See the Histoire for more on the recurring alliances of southern French rulers against the Count of Toulouse.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF16, ep.221, p.70.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1163-1164