---
letter_id: "24211"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (1261)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (1261)"
ltr_date: "1261"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-10"
url: "/letter/504.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The king to all, etc., greetings.  Know that we have seen the letters sent to us of the illustrious lady Marguerite, by the grace of God queen of France, in these words:
To the more serene man, her dearest brother, Henry, by the grace of God king of England, Marguerite by that same grace queen of France, greetings and affection of sincere love.
Your serenity should know that William of Latymer and Master Henry of Gandavo, in the presence of brother Peter Bostelli, treasurer of the house of the Temple in Paris, and brother Nicholas, his associate, Robert of Giroliis, knight, Peter of Landun, our chamberlain, and William of Aureliac, our cleric, showed us certain jewels of yours, namely a certain large crown; a buckle/brooch with ruby; a ring with a ruby; three gold crowns; an imperial cap; four stoppers [ferta]; one alphabet; three gold combs; fifty-two buckles; ten sceptres containing two hundred eight rings with rubies and balass rubies; also two sceptres containing sixty-two rings with emeralds; a sceptre containing twenty rings with topazes; one sceptre containing seventeen rings with different stones; seventy-six girdles/belts; also two gold peacocks; one buckle with two diamonds, fourteen other buckles, and five gold circlets.
And we had all these placed in the Temple at Paris in two coffers under our seal, with aforesaid brother Peter receiving them; but the keys of said coffers, aforementioned William Latymer and Master Henry, your envoys, took with them.
Dated Tuesday after Pentecost at St. Germain-en-Laye; in the presence of witnesses of which we had our seal affixed.
The king as witness at the tower of London, on the 6th of November.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[Rex omnibus, &c. salutem.  Sciatis nos litteras illustris Dominae Margaretae, Dei gratia, Reginae Franciae, nobis directas inspexisse in haec verba.]
Serenissimo viro, fratri suo karissimo, Henrico, Dei gratia, Regi Angliae illustri, Margareta, eadem gratia Franciae Regina salutem, & sincerae dilectionis affectum.
Noverit Serenitas vestra quod, Willielmus de Latymer, & Magister Henricus de Gandavo, praesentibus fratre Petro Bostelli, domus Templi Paris Thesaurario, & fratre Nicholao socio ejus, Roberto de Giroliis Milite, Petro de Landuno Cambellano nostro, & Guillelmo de Aureliaco Clerico nostro, nobis ostenderunt quaedam jocalia vestra, videlicet, Quandam magnam Coronam; unum firmaculum cum rubectis; unum anulum cum rubecto; trs Coronas aureas; unum capellum imperatorium; quatuor serta; unum alphabetum; tria pectina aurea; quinquaginta duo firmacula; decem baculos continentes ducentos octo anulos cum rubetis & balesiis; item duos baculos continentes sexaginta sex anulos cum maragdenibus; unum baculum continentem viginti anulos cum saphiris; unum baculum continentem tresdecim anulos cum topaciis; unum baculum continentem decem & septem anulos cum topaciis; unum baculum continentem decem & septem anulos cum diversis lapidibus; sexaginta sexdecim zonas; item duos pavones aureos; unum firmaculum cum duobus diamantibus, alia quatuordecim firmacula, & quinque garlandas aureas.
Et ista omnia in duobus Coffris sub contra sigillo nostro, recipiente ea fratre Petro praedicto, deponi fecimus Parisius apud Templum; claves vero dictorum Coffrorum secum deferunt dicti Willielmus Latymer & Magister Henricus Nuncii vestri.
Data die Martis post Pentecosten apud Sanctum Germanum in Laya;
In cujus rei testimonium praesentibus sigillum nostrum fecimus apponi.
Teste Rege apud Turrim London, sexto die Novembris.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Henry sent a collection of royal jewels to his sister-in-law to be deposited in the house of the Temple in Paris for safe-keeping during the English rebellion. She received the jewels, which she lists in the letter, and entrusted them to reliable men in the Temple. She sent the jewels back to Henry in 1272 (Sivery, 191-92). The letter is summarized in the <em>Calendar of the Patent Rolls of Henry III</em>, 5.190, dated 1261, Nov. 6: Inspeximus of letters of Margaret, queen of France, dated at St. Germain-en-Laye, Tuesday after Whitsunday, stating that William le Latymer and Master Henry de Gandavo, in the presence of Peter Buscel (Boscelli), treasurer of the Temple, Paris, brother Nicholas his fellow, Robert de Giroliis knight, Peter de Lauduno, chamberlain of the said Margaret, and William de Aureliaco, her clerk, showed to her certain jewels of the king [recited] and the said Peter receiving them in two chests under her counter-seal, the said Margaret caused them to be deposited at the Temple, Paris, and the said William Latimer and Henry, the king's envoys, are bearing the keys of the said chests.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>Rymer, Foedera, 1.2.65
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1261