---
letter_id: "24212"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (1263)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (1263)"
ltr_date: "1263"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-07"
url: "/letter/505.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
receivers:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
    url: /people/21381.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Marguerite, by grace of God queen of France, to her dearest brother Henry, by that same grace illustrious king of England, greetings and affection of sincere love.
Wishing with the whole desire of our mind [to know] about your state, we ask your excellence if it please you to send back to us, letting us know about that state, may the Almighty make it prosperous and happy, and informing us if you wish us to do anything for you; for we are ready to do so with grateful/agreeable spirit.  Your sublimity should know that our lord the king, we, and all our children are well, by the grace of God.  Be healthy and for a long time.
Dated St. Germain-en-Laye, nones of March.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Margareta, Dei gratia Francie regina, carissimo fratri Henrico, eadem gratia regi Anglie illustri, salutem et sincere dilectionis affectum. De statu vestro toto mentis desiderio cupientes, excellentiam vestram rogamus quatinus de ipso statu, quem faciat Altissimus prosperum et jocundum, nos reddatis, si placeat, certiores, intimando nobis si quid volueritis nos facturas pro vobis; nam id parate sumus grato animo adimplere. Sane vestra noscat sublimitas quod dominus noster rex, nos et omnes liberi nostri, per Dei gratiam, sani sumus. Valete bene et diu. Datum Sancto-Germano-in-Laya, II non. marcii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>An exchange with her brother-in-law about family health, which may well have been accompanied by more important messages delivered orally.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre</em>, ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.145, ep.116; also in Rymer, Foedera, 1.757.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1263