---
letter_id: "24214"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (1263)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (1263)"
ltr_date: "1263"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-07"
url: "/letter/507.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
receivers:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
    url: /people/21381.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Marguerite, by grace of God queen of France, to her dearest brother Henry, by that same grace illustrious king of England, greetings and affection of sincere love.
Having understood from your letters, brought to us by the messenger of our lord the king whom he had recently sent to you, that your state which had been weak, is improving and receiving the increase of prosperity and recovery, blessed [be] the Almighty, our mind which had fallen into grief and sorrow because of your illness, takes in and receives the strength of joy.  May your sublimity know about the state of our lord king, of us, and of all our children, that we are well with full health by the Lord's generosity.
The answer to all those things which the archdeacon of London and lord H. of Monferrato related to us orally and we carefully heard, we have put in their mouths to make to you about said things, in which you may firmly believe as [you would] us.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Margareta, Dei gratia Francie regina, carissimo fratri suo Henrico, eadem gratia regi Anglie illustri, salutem et sincere dilectionis affectum. Intellecto per vestras litteras, quas nobis obtulit ex parte vestra nuncius domini nostri regis quem ad vos miserat hiis diebus, quod status vester, qui debilis fuerat, resurgit in melius recipiendo augmentum prosperitatis et convalescentie (benedictus Altissimus), mens nostra que lapsa fuerat in dolorem et tristitiam, occasione vestre egritudinis, hausit vires gaudii et recepit. De statu quidem domini nostri regis, nostro et omnium liberorum nostrorum sic vestra noscat sublimitas, quod plena corporum sospitate valemus, Domino largiente. Omnibus enim intellectis diligenter que archidiaconus Londoniensis et dominus H. de Monte-Ferrando nobis ex parte vestra verbotenus retulerunt, ecce quod in ore ipsorum responsionem vobis faciendam de predictis posuimus, quibus super hiis credatis firmiter tanquam nobis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Another exchange with her brother-in-law about family health, but here the queen makes explicit reference to the more important and delicate matters handled orally.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre,</em> ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.148, ep.120; also in Rymer, Foedera, 1.758-59.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1263