---
letter_id: "24227"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (1276)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (1276)"
ltr_date: "1276"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/520.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
receivers:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21314.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the magnificent prince, our dearest nephew, Edward, by grace of God illustrious king of England, Marguerite, by the same grace queen of France, greetings and affection of sincere love.
We seek and request your serenity to wish favorably to carry into effect the entreaties which the count of Savoy, our dearest uncle, made to you for the cleric, Grimoard of Altevigne/ Hautesvignes* (who, together with the nuncio of the lord Pope, worked and still works diligently to restore peace between the king of Germany and our said uncle), for our sake and the sake of our said uncle, so that same Grimoard may feel that your favor and grace towards him have increased.
Give at Matise, on the Friday before the feast of St. Clement [November 23].
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Magnifico principi, nepoti nostro karissimo, Edwardo, Dei gratia, illustri Regi Angliae, Margareta, eadem gratia, Franciae Regina, salutem, & sincerae dilectionis affectum.
Serenitatem vestram requirimus et rogamus, quatenus preces, quas comes Sabaudiae, avunculus noster karissimus, vobis porrigit pro Grimoardo de Altis Vineis clerico (qui, una cum domini Papae nuncio, pro pace reformanda inter Regem Alemanie, et praefatum avunculum nostrum laboravit, et laborat sollicite), intuitu praedicti avunculi nostri, et nostro velitis adeo favorabiliter effectui mancipare, quod idem Grimoardus sibi sentiat apud vos favorem et gratiam accreyisse.
Dat. apud Matisc, die Veneris ante festum beati Clementis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Marguerite commends to her nephew the envoy Grimoard who has been working with a papal envoy for peace between her uncle [Philip], the count of Savoy, and the king of Germany [Rudolph of Habsburg], whose election in 1273 threatened Savoyard holdings in western Helvetia.  The queen, always alert to alliances that might support her and her sister Eleanor's claims in Provence against Charles of Anjou, supported the peace efforts.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>* Altis Vineis in one edition of Rymer, Altis tineis in another.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 2.537, 1.2.155 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1276