---
letter_id: "24230"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (c.1278)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (c.1278)"
ltr_date: "c.1278"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/523.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the very high and excellent prince, her very dear and beloved nephew Edward, by the grace of God king of England, Margeurite, by that same grace queen of France, greetings and true love.
Very dear nephew, as we have always desired and worked within our power for good peace and love between your good father and you and our dear lord the king of France and our children, and our Lord in his mercy has given us grace in our time, we have looked for a way, if it could be done, to bring your heart and the heart of our son the king closer together in good love and to remove every kind of conflict that might exist between you, that is by the marriage of your son and one of the daughters of the king our son; for which thing we would work most willingly if we knew it pleased you.  So we beg you to send us your will in this matter and send us your state and your will which we shall follow most willingly.  Of our state, we inform you that thanks to God we are now in quite good health; may Our Lord keep you.
Dated Sens in Burgundy, the day after the feast of St. Matthew.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>A très haut et très excellent prince, son très chier et très amé neveu Edoard, par la grace de Dieu roy d’Angleterre, Marguerite, par icele mesme grace reine de France, salut et vrai amour. Très chiers niés, come nous aions tousjors désirré et trevaillié à nostre pooir, coment bonne pais et bonne amour fust gardée entre vostre bon père et vos et nostre chier segnour le roi de France et nos enfans, et nostre Sire, par sa pitié, nous en ait doné grace en nostre temps, nous avons regardé une voie par laquelle nous antandons, se elle se faisoit, que li cuer de vous et de nostre fil le roi porroient estre plus joint ainsemble par bonne amour, et que toute manière de content qui porroit estre entre vous porroit estre ostée, c’est à savoir que mariages se feist de vostre fil et d’une des filles le roi nostre fil; de laquelle chause nous nous travailleronts mout voluntiers, se nous savions que i vous pleust. Si vous prions que vous nous mandés de ceste chause vostre volunté, et nous mandés vostre estat, et vostre volunté, laquel nous suirons mout voluntiers. Du nostre estat vous faisons-nous asavoir que nous sommes orendroit en assés bon point de cors, Dieu merci; Nostres Sires vous gart. Doné à Sans en Bourgogne, l’endemain de la feste Seint-Mati.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The dowager queen proposes a marriage between her nephew's son and one of her granddaughters, but such an arrangement was never made.  The letter is in French.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre,</em> ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.217-18, ep.170</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1278