---
letter_id: "24231"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (c.1279)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (c.1279)"
ltr_date: "c.1279"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/524.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the magnificent prince, our dearest nephew Edward, by the grace of God illustrious king of England, Marguerite, by that same grace queen of France, greetings and affection of sincere love.
We ask your serenity and request if it please you, to remember those courtesies which Yves Breton, once a townsman of Paris, did us, and to act favorably toward master Walter, the son of that Yves, bearer of the presents, in those things which he has to do there, as befits your honor, that that same master may rejoice that he has accomplished what he intended.
Dated the abbey of Longchamps, on the eve of St. Michael the archangel.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Magnifico principi, nepoti nostro karissimo, Edwardo, Dei gratia illustri regi Anglie, Margarita, eadem gratia Franciae regina, salutem et sincere dilectionis affectum. Serenitatem vestram requirimus et rogamus quatinus curialitates quas nobis olim fecit Yvo Brito, quondam burgensis Parisiensis, si placet ad memoriam reducentes, erga magistrum Galterum, ejusdem Yvonis filium, latorem presencium, sic favorabiliter vos geratis in hiis que habet apud vos facere, prout decet honorem vestrum, quod idem magister assequtum se gaudeat quod intendit. Datum in abbatia Longi-Campi, in vigilia beati Michaelis archangeli.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The dowager queen commends one of her people to her nephew.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre,</em> ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.241, ep.187</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1279