---
letter_id: "24232"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (c.1280)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (c.1280)"
ltr_date: "c.1280"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/525.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
receivers:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21314.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the very high and noble prince our very dear nephew, Edward, by the grace of God king of England, Marguerite, by that same grace queen of France, greetings and true love.
Dear nephew, the countess of Leicester begged us and requested at her end/death that we beg you to have mercy on her and her will, and asked us also to beg you for Amaury and her cleric son, that you take pity on them ... that you would do right and grant them your grace.  And because we promised her that we would do it, we beg you ... things, and beg you again to see and command that the need which touches ... of said lady ... and released according to the law, usage, and custom of the country.  And .. of the .. to the cleric, and ... the honors and goods, that God may be grateful to you and us and the goods ... act in such a way that you can not be faulted.  And in these things, if it please you, your will ...
Monday before the feast of St. Denis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>A très haut et très noble prince nostre très chier neveu, Edouard, par la grace de Dieu roy d’Engleterre, Marguerite, par cele meisme grace roine de France, salut et vrai amour. Chiers niés, la comtesse de Leycestre nous pria et requist à sa fin que nous vous preisons que vous eussiez pitié de li et de son testament, et nous requist aussi que nous preisons de Amauri et son fil clerc, que vous eussiez pitié de li.....vous li feissiez droit et rendissiez vostre grace. Et pour ce que nous li promeismes que nous le ferions, nous vous priames de.....choses, et vous en prions encores que vous vuilliez fere et commander que la besogne qui touche le.....à la dite dame......et délivrée tant comme droiz, et li us, et la custume de païs pourront doner. Et d.....de la.....au clerc, et.....que heneurs et boen soit, et tant que Diex vous en sache gré et nous et bones.....fetes en tant que vous n’en puissiez estre blamez. Et de ces choses, s’il vous plaisoit, vostre volonté.....le lundi devant la feste saint Denis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Respecting the request of Simon of Montfort's dying widow, the dowager queen asks the king of England to be merciful and just to their sons.  The letter is in French.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre</em>, ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.251, ep.198</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1280