---
letter_id: "23763"
title: "A letter from Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress (995)"
ititle: "a letter from adelaide of burgundy, ottonian empress (995)"
ltr_date: "995"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-03-24"
url: "/letter/53.html"
senders:
  - id: 19
    name: Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress
    iname: adelaide of burgundy, ottonian empress
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21193
    name: abbot Gozpert
    iname: abbot gozpert
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>By the ruling mercy of almighty God, Adelaide, imperial ruler temporally governing the Christian people, to G[ozpert], venerable man, greetings and grace.
Since the breadth of divine power subjected to us, as it deigned, the rule of so many kingdoms, merciful, it reconciled to us many and powerful friends everywhere, whom we sometimes care for in absence, now administer by our presence.  For which we came to the bishop of Augsburg a short time ago, and we have almost completed the stated time to remain with him.  When the time is over and we return to the fatherland of Saxony, the direction of our journey will bring us to your Würzburg on the ides of August.  Therefore, since we remember that our great friend the bishop will not be at home, our people advised that it would be circumspect to send a messenger so that you could order a place to be prepared for us to stay, food provided for the carts and horses, and stipends/tribute for us and our companions.  About the neighboring place . . .
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Inperitante Dei omnipotentis clementia Adelheida regnatrix augusta regimini christiane plebis temporaliter prelata G. venerando viro salutem et gratiam.
Quia latitudo divine potestatis subiecit nobis, que ipsa est dignata, quam plurima regnorum imperia, multos et clemens ubique potentes placavit amicos, quos colimus interdum absentes, modo namque nobis ministratur a presentibus, huius rei occasione antistitem Vindelicensis Auguste dudum adiveramus, aput quem manendi cursus statuti temporis iam pene perfeceramus et evolutis dierum spatiis revisentes patriam Saxonie habitationis directione nostri itineris adducimur vestre Herbipolensi die quo idus numeratur mensis Augusti. Quocirca quia amicissimum nostrum episcopum domi non esse recordati sumus, cautum fore nostri sunt consiliati, si nuntium premitteremus, ut nobis previderi iubeatis
hospitia ad manendum, pabula curruum et equorum ante tempus adquirantur, stipendia nobis nosque concomitantibus prevideantur. De propinquo namque loco . . .
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>This announcement of the arrival of her entourage and request for provision for them is the only personal letter I have seen from the empress.  It breaks off before the end.  The last lines have either been omitted or, as Marian Krzesinski suggested in a note to me, erased, to eliminate any reference to the Polish province of the Roman church (Sclavanensis Provincia).  He notes that Adelaide and Otto III, her grandson, were present at the ceremony in which the province was officially founded.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH <em>Die Tegernsee Briefsammlung,</em> aus der Zeit Abt Gozperts, ep.16 p.16</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>995