---
letter_id: "24237"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (c.1280)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (c.1280)"
ltr_date: "c.1280"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/530.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the magnificent prince, our dearest nephew Edward, by the grace of God illustrious king of England, Marguerite, by that same grace queen of the French, greetings and affection of sincere love.
When master John of Perugia, beloved to us in Christ, clerk of the archbishop of Canterbury of happy memory, our dearest uncle, who was unjustly as it was said despoiled of possession of the church of Charing, was to be restored by authority of the apostolic see, as we have been told, certain of your subjects recently expelled the agent of that master John from possession of that church by violence.  Wherefore we request and ask your serenity making accord for our sake and the remembered pious affection of our said uncle to master John, to ... said violence to him ... corrected as is just, not permitting him to be molested without cause over said church.
Dated Poissy, Thursday before the feast of St. Gregory.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Magnifico principi, nepoti nostro carissimo Edwardo, Dei gratia illustri regi Anglie, Margareta, eadem gratia Francorum regina, salutem et sincere dilectionis affectum. Cum magister Johannes de Perogiis, nobis in Christo dilectus, clericus quondam felicis recordationis archiepiscopi Cantuariensis avunculi nostri carissimi, ad possessionem ecclesie de Charignes de qua, sicut dicit, olim injuste spoliatus fuerat, foret, sicut nobis relatum extitit, auctoritate sedis apostolice restitutus, quidam subditi vestri procuratorem ipsius magistri Johannis de possessione ipsius ecclesie nuper cum violentia, sicut dicitur, expulerunt. Quare serenitatem vestram requirimus et rogamus quatinus, intuitu nostro et predicti avunculi nostri, memorato magistro Johanni pio compacientes affectu, predictam violentiam eidem faci....lacet prout justum fuerit emendari, ipsum non permittentes super dicta ecclesia indebite molestari. Datum apud Pissiacum, die jovis ante festum beati Gregorii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The dowager queen writes to her nephew on behalf of a clerk of their deceased uncle, Boniface, archbishop of Canterbury, who has been violently dispossessed of his church.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre,</em> ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.277, ep.221</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1280