---
letter_id: "24239"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (c.1280)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (c.1280)"
ltr_date: "c.1280"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/532.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
receivers:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21314.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the magnificent prince, her dearest nephew Edward, by grace of God illustrious king of England, Marguerite, by that same grace queen of France, greetings and affection of sincere love.
We have received with happy hand the letters of your serenity in which you took care to tell us of the prosperity of your state, for which we are very grateful to you; and since you asked to be made certain about our state in those letters, we want you to know that when we wrote this we were thriving, by God's authority, with agreeable health of body, the which we wish to have conveyed to our ears about you.  Your letters also mentioned that we should offer our advice to your messengers happily acting in your affairs.  But we did not see those messengers, nor were we asked by them anything about your affairs; we are and will be always joyfully ready to act for what we know pleases your desire.  So we shall carry out your will with happy spirit whenever it pleases you to tell us what you wish.
Dated Paris, on the fifteenth after Easter.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Magnifico principi, nepoti suo carissimo Edwardo, Dei gratia illustri regi Anglie, Margareta, eadem gracia Francie regina, salutem et sincere dilectionis affectum. Vestre serenitatis litteras manu leta recepimus per quas prosperitatem status vestri nobis intimare curastis, super quo vobis referimus multas grates; et quia super statu nostro certiorari per easdem litteras petiistis, scire vos volumus quod in confectione presentium vigebamus, auctore Domino, sanitate corporis satis grata, quod de vobis nostris vellemus auribus sepius intimari. Demum vestre continebant littere ut nunciis vestris in agendis vestris feliciter, nostrum consilium preberemus. Sane ipsos non vidimus nuncios, nec per ipsos requisite fuimus super aliquibus que contingerent facta vestra; semper enim parate sumus et erimus procurare gratanter que noverimus vestris desideriis complacare. Unde voluntatem vestram nobis significare velitis quotienscumque vobis placuerit, quam leto animo exequemur. Datum Parisius, in quindena Pasche.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The dowager queen tells her nephew that the messengers who were to consult her orally about a matter never arrived.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre,</em> ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.279, ep.223</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1280