---
letter_id: "24241"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (c.1281)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (c.1281)"
ltr_date: "c.1281"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/534.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
receivers:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21314.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Very dear nephew, you in your great goodness, lent us my lord Jean de Grailly, to be with us at Mâcon three weeks of September, on the day we decided.  And as you ordered said my lord Jean to be with you three weeks from St. Michel, know, fair nephew, that we could not be at Mâcon as quickly as we thought, because of the heaviness of our body; therefore it would be too great a shame if sir Jean left us so soon.  So we beg you to give him respite to be with us until the fifth week from St. Michel; for by then, if it please God, he will be with you.
Dear nephew, we are on the way to Mâcon and intend to be at Trèes (Troyes?) Thursday before St. Michel.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Très chiers niés, vous nous avés presté, vostre très grant merci, monseigneur Jehan de Grelli, que il soit aveques nous à Mascon as trois semaines de la Sétembresche, au jor que nous i avons pris. Et come vous aiés mandé audit monseigneur Jehan que il soit à vos as trois semaines de la Seint-Michiel, sachés, biaus niés, que nous ne povons mie estre à Mascon si tost come nous cuideons, pour la pesantume de nostre cors; pour quoi nous aurions trop grant domage se i covenoit que messire Jehan se partoit si tost de nous. Si vous prions que vous li donés respit d’estre à nous jusque à V semaines de la Seint-Michel: car laurs, se Deu plait, il sera à vous. Chiers niés, nous nos en alons vers Mascon et entendons estre à Trèes le jeudi devant la Seint-Michel.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Since she has been detained by physical problems, the dowager queen asks her nephew to extend the stay of Jean de Grailly, Edward's seneschal in Gascony, whom he sent to Marguerite as an advisor in asserting her claims to Provence.  The letter is in French.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre</em>, ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.282, ep.226</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1281