---
letter_id: "24243"
title: "A letter from Marguerite of Provence (1282)"
ititle: "a letter from marguerite of provence (1282)"
ltr_date: "1282"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-26"
url: "/letter/536.html"
senders:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
receivers:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21314.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the very high, noble prince, her very dear, beloved nephew, Edward, by the grace of God king of England, Marguerite, by that same grace queen of France, greetings and true love.
Very dear nephew, as you asked that we excuse you that you can not now come to our aid in our need in Provence, as you have always courteously promised us [you would], in your goodness, because of the problem that has occurred in Wales, know that we have excused you from this need for the present.  And we beg you that you remember in the [proper] place and time that good promise that you have always made us; for as one who has been more feared and encouraged by the good will that you have for us and our cause we have special trust in you to advance our cause.   And know that we agree to delay our cause in the matter of Spain until Our Lord has brought yours to a good point.
And know that our heart is distressed by the harm which the prince of Wales and his brothers have done and are doing to you; as one who holds your needs as ours, and who would willingly give you the best counsel we could in all your needs.  So we pray you to send to us if you see that we might give you any counsel in this need, in which we offer you ourself and all we have; for nothing would be too much for your pleasure.  And although, fair nephew, you are wiser and better advised than we are, still we advise you and pray you that you act wisely in this need, and that you remember the events and adventures that happened in the other war caused by count Simon.
For God, fair nephew, send to us often about the state of yourself and your needs, for we shall be very comforted when we hear good news.  May Our Lord keep you.
Dated Mâcon, Tuesday after Pentecost.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>A très haut et très noble prince, son très chier et très amé neveu Edoard, par la grâce de Dieu roi d’Angleterre, Marguerite par cele meisme grâce reine de France, salut et verai amour. Très chiers niés, come vous nous aiez requis que nous vous houssons par escusé de ce que vous ne poez orendroit entendre à nous aidier en nostre besoigne de Provance, si come vous nous avez tozjorz cortoisement promis, vestre bone et merci, pour l’esoine qui vous est sorvenue en Gales, sachez que nous avons bien escuse de ceste besoigne, quant à ores, et vous prions que i vous sovigne en leu et en tems de la bone promesse que vous nous avés tozjours fete: quart nous avons especial fiance en vous de l’avancement de nostre besoigne come cele qui ha esté plus redotée et mise en meilour point par la bonne velonté que vous avez à nous et à la besoigne. Et sachez que nous nous convenrons de déloier la nostre besoigne sus la besoigne d’Espaigne, jusque tant que Nostre Sires ait mise en bon point la vostre besoigne; et sachez que nous somes à grant mesaise de cuer du domaige que li princes de Gales et ses frères vous hont fait et font, comme cele qui tenons voz besoignes à noz, et qui metrions volontiers tout le meilour consoil que nous porrions en toutes voz besoignes. Si vous prions que vous nous mandez, se vous véez que nous peussons nul consoil metre en ceste besoigne, en laquelle nous vous offrons et le cors et quant que nous avons; quar nous n’aurions riens chier à faire vestre plaisir, et jà soit ce, biaux niés, que vous séez plus saiges et plus avisez que nous ne somes, toute voie vous avisons-nous et vous prions que vous vous contenez saigement en ceste besoigne, et que i vo sovigne des cas et des aventures qui avindrent en l’autre guerre que mut li cuens Symon. Pour Dieu, biaux niés, mandez-nous sovent l’estat de vestre cors et celui de voz besoignes; quar nous serons mout reconfortées toutes les fois que nous en porrons oir bones novelles. Nostre Sires vous gart. Doné à Macon, le mardi après la Penthecoste.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The dowager queen writes to accept her nephew's excuses for not sending aid he had promised her in raising an army to press her claims in Provence, understanding that his need to put down a rebellion in Wales must come first.  It is a gracious letter, given that she has been gathering her forces and needs only his to be able to move, though she does remind him that she had helped him and his parents during the dissensions in England.  Edward had tried peaceful means to settle the Provence claims for his mother and aunt, but could not move his intransigent uncle, Charles of Anjou.  The letter is in French.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre,</em> ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.299-300, ep.235; also given on 1.186-87, ep.150, with an incorrect date.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1282