---
letter_id: "23764"
title: "A letter from Rather, bishop of Verona (968)"
ititle: "a letter from rather, bishop of verona (968)"
ltr_date: "968"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-16"
url: "/letter/54.html"
senders:
  - id: 21547
    name: Rather, bishop of Verona
    iname: rather, bishop of verona
    type: people
    url: /people/21547.html
receivers:
  - id: 19
    name: Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress
    iname: adelaide of burgundy, ottonian empress
    type: woman
    url: /woman/19.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most serene, imperial lady Adelaide, by whom not disdained, R[ather] faithful sinner to be able to serve beyond his debt.
If it is true, what Nanno [count of Verona] tried to persuade all my adversaries, you desire nothing more than my destruction, no less than your husband cares for the state of my health/safety.  But if you do this for the bishopric, let your power endeavor to preserve my little bit of life until I have completed the church of the blessed mother of God.  Know as God is my witness that I will be altogether ready to do what you order from then on, with reason as my guide.  I desire rather to withdraw with my health and live in the solitude of my monastery and there await the Lord, may he keep me safe from pusillanimity of spirit and from storm, than to tolerate such things any longer uselessly to the detriment of my soul.
O how I have suggested truly to all who are placed in positions of power, that it is not ever advantageous to your rule to make precipitous judgments, but to heed Job:  "the cause I do not know I shall diligently investigate."
Aloe, lady, does not make the swollen stomach belch the sweetness of honey, and he cleverly desires to deceive, who praises what he hates.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Serenissime, quibus non dedignatur, auguste domine Adeleidi R[atherius] peccator fidele ultra debitum ultraque posse servitium.
Si verum est, quod Nanno omnibus persuadere mei conatur adversariis, nil amplius quam meum desideratis interitum, nil minus vester iugalis quam statum meae curat salutis. Sed si pro episcopatu hoc agitis, satagite meam tantillum servare vestra potentia vitam, usque dum beate Dei genitricis habeam perfectam ecclesiam. Paratissimum ad id faciendum, quod mihi exinde ratione praeceperitis duce, me nam fore omnino, Deum testor, scitote. Elongari enim potius salubriter et habitare in monasterii mei desidero solitudine et ibi Dominum expectare, qui me salvum faciat a pusillanimitate spiritus et tempestate, quam talia diutius cum animae detrimento inutiliter etiam tolerare. 0 vero quam omnibus, qui in potestate sunt constituti, ut non semel vestrae dominationi suggessi, prodesset, si non tam praecipites sententias ferrent, sed illud beati Iob attendissent: Caussam, quam ne sciebam, diligentissime investigabam.
Aloe, domina, stomachus tumens mellis non ructuat dulcedinem, et ingeniose fallere gestit, qui laudat, quod odit.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Rather complains about Adelaide's hostility towards him and asks to be allowed to finish his work on a church and then retire to a monastery.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH BDKz 1 ep.31 p.179-80; also in PL136 c686.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>968