---
letter_id: "24256"
title: "A letter from Henry III (1264, Feb.8)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii (1264, feb.8)"
ltr_date: "1264, Feb.8"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/549.html"
senders:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
    url: /people/21381.html
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>tTo all whom the present letters reach, Henry, by grace of God king of England, etc., [sends] greetings.
Know that we have given the excellent Lady and dearest sister, Lady Marguerite, illustrious queen of France, full power to arrange, complete, and make peace or concord in our name, over the matter of Bergerac and its appurtenances, with Reginald of Pons and Marguerite of Turen. his wife, as seems most expeditious; whatever will have been done by said lady queen or with her in our place, is to be held confirmed and fixed in what has been said above.
In [witness] of which, etc.
Dated at Whitsand, on the 8th of February.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Universis, ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Henricus, Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, etc. salutem.
Noveritis nos Excellenti Domine, et Sorori Karissimae, Dominae Margaretae Reginae Franciae illustri, plenam dedisse potestatem componendi, transigendi, et pacem seu concordiam, nomine nostro, faciendi, super facto Brigeriaci et pertinentiis ipsius, cum Reginaldo de Pontibus, et Margareta de Turen. uxore sua, prout melius viderit expedire;
Ratum habituri et firmum quicquid per dictam Dominam Reginam, vel cum ipsi, loco nostri, actum fuerit in praemissis.
In cujus, etc.
Dat. apud Whitsand, 8 die Febr.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>A long dispute between Renaud de Pons (Reynold de Pontibus) and his wife, Margaret de Turenne, on one side and the English crown on the other over the castle of Bergerac was turned over to Marguerite to settle. This public letter from Henry grants Marguerite full power to negotiate the settlement for him. It is also recorded in the Calendar of the Patent Rolls, 5.380, dated 1264, February 8. In another public letter, Henry states that he accepts her judgment for himself and his heirs (Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.842). Marguerite found for Renaud and his wife (see her public letter, Recueil d'actes relatifsl'Administration des rois d'Angleterre en Guyenne au XIIIe siècle, 224-26, <em>Epistolae</em><span style="background-color: transparent;"><em>&nbsp;</em>513.html).</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera,</em> 3rd ed. 2.84.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1264, Feb.8