---
letter_id: "24257"
title: "A letter from Henry III (11/18/1264)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii (11/18/1264)"
ltr_date: "11/18/1264"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/550.html"
senders:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
    url: /people/21381.html
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>Request to the king of France not to permit or give his consent to any sale or alienation of the king's rights or feudalities which certain persons are trying to make against his will or knowledge, and to give credence in this matter to Master Eadward, dean of Wells, whom the king is sending to him on this and other business.<br>[<em>Foedera.</em>] In like manner is written to the queen of France. <br>[<em>Foedera</em>.] To the legate. The king is sending the said dean, the bearer of these letters, to the king and queen of France, the legate and other friends in those parts, to explain to them and him the affairs of the realm, and has learned by experience that the business for which the legate is sent to England can be done better by him by the way of lenity and kindness than by ecclesiasttical coercion in these days and begs him to act graciously in the matter so that it may be to the honour of God and to the peace and tranquillity of the realm. And he is to give credence in these and other matters to the said dean.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Henry wrote letters to Louis and to Marguerite asking them to protect his holdings presumably from Simon de Montfort who might attempt to act in his name without his permission.  The Calendar summarizes them in English.  Henry's letter to Louis's envoys who came to England to conduct Henry's envoys back to France specify that Henry's envoys were to see the king, the queen and the papal legate (5.473-74, dated 1264, November 10).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Calendar of the Patent Rolls of the Reign of Henry III,</em> 5 (1258-66), 474</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>11/18/1264