---
letter_id: "24260"
title: "A letter from Alphonse of Poitiers (1265)"
ititle: "a letter from alphonse of poitiers (1265)"
ltr_date: "1265"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/553.html"
senders:
  - id: 21219
    name: Alphonse of Poitiers
    iname: alphonse of poitiers
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most excellent and his dearest sister, Marguerite, by the grace of God most illustrious queen of the French, Alphonse, son of the king of France, count of Poitiers and Toulouse, greetings and a will prepared to [do her] pleasure with fraternal love.
Since you asked us by letter not to permit William Arnold of Salvignac, Bernard Raymond of Gavaret, John Henry, his brother, Thomas of Logarac, and John of Gorni, citizens of Bayonne who were detained captive in Paris and similarly William Arnold Dupuy to be received in our land or dominion, we make known to your excellency that we charged our faithful Orange seneschal by letter, for love of you, that he not permit the aforesaid Bayonne citizens to be received in our land or dominion.
Dated Longpont, Monday after the beheading of St. John the Baptist.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Excellentissime domine et karissime sorori sue Margarite, Dei gratia Francorum regine illustrissime, Alfonsus, filius regis Francie, comes Pictavie et Tholose, salutem et cum fraterna dilectione paratam ad beneplacita voluntatem. Cum nos per vestras litteras rogaveritis ut Guillermum Arnaldi de Salvingnaco, Bernardum Remondi de Gavaret, Johannem Henrici, fratrem ejus, Thomam de Logarac et Johannem de Gorni, cives Bayonenses, qui detinebantur capti Parisius ac similiter Guillelmum Arnaldi de Podio in terra seu dominio nostro non permitteremus receptari, excellentie vestre significamus quod nos dilecto et fideli nostro senescallo Xanctonensi per litteras nostras mandavimus, propter amorem vestrum, quod supradictos cives Bayonenses in terra seu dominio nostro non permittat aliquatenus receptari. Datum apud Longumpontem, die lune post decollationem sancti Johannis Baptiste.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The queen asked her brother-in-law not to receive the men of Bayonne who had kept her sister, the queen of England, from getting the ships she needed to transport her army, in his land (ep.2027, 515.html).  In an earlier response (ep.2026, 552html), Alphonse said he supported his brother king Louis on the issue.  In this letter, he agrees to keep the men out of his lands.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Correspondance Administrative d'Alfonse de Poitiers,</em> ed. Auguste Molinier (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1894), Collection de Documents indédits sur l'Histoire de France, 2.549, ep.2028.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1265