---
letter_id: "24262"
title: "A letter from Edward I, king of England (c.1280)"
ititle: "a letter from edward i, king of england (c.1280)"
ltr_date: "c.1280"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-07"
url: "/letter/555.html"
senders:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most serene lady and his dearest aunt, lady Marguerite, by grace of God illustrious queen of the French, Edward, by that same grace, etc., greetings and ready will to [her] pleasure with sincere love.
Desiring to hear prosperous reports about your state, may the Lord always keep it healthy, we request and ask your excellence to let us know with certainty about your state whenever you have the opportunity.  And to satisfy your desires about our state, let it be known to your highness that we rejoice fully in the benefit of health by the grace of God, as we wish and desire to hear frequently about your serenity.
Be well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Serenissime domine ac amite sue carrissime, domine Margarete, Dei gratia regine Francorum illustri, Edwardus, eadem gratia, etc. salutem et cum dilectione sincera promptam voluntatem ad grata. Desiderantes de statu vestro, quem Dominus semper salubrem efficiat, prosperos audire rumores, excellentiam vestram requirimus et rogamus quatinus super eodem statu vestro, quociens vobis oportunitas aderit, nos velitis reddere certiores. Ut igitur de statu nostro vestris desideriis satisfiat, vestre celsitudini innotescat quod per Dei gratiam plene guademus beneficio sospitatis, quod de serenitate vestra frequenter audire cupimus et optamus. Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king writes to his aunt about his health and hers.  More important matters may have been relayed orally by the bearer of the letter.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Roi</em>s, <em>Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre,</em> ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.267, ep.211</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>c.1280