---
letter_id: "24263"
title: "A letter from Edward I (1280)"
ititle: "a letter from edward i (1280)"
ltr_date: "1280"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-12-10"
url: "/letter/556.html"
senders:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his very dear lady and aunt, my lady Marguerite, by the grace of God queen of France, Edward, by the same grace king of England, greetings and good love.
My lady, about what you sent to us concerning your case, for which you have done hommage to the king of Germany and the king of Sicily is denying your right, since this case is not moving towards settlement as we desire,in which case you have asked for our help; know, lady, that we are determined to help you and that we will do it willingly.
And because you have sent to us asking us to let you know what help we will give, we tell you, my lady, that we shall help you with our people in such a way that you will consider yourself satisfied.
And you, if it pleases you, let us know the place and the day that you make your summons, so we can send our people; for we have great desire of doing what we can for you, as our dear aunt.
To God, lady, may he keep you.
Dated Sooton, the 20th of September, the eighth year of our reign.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>A Sa treschere Dame e Taunte, ma Dame M. par la grace de Dieu, Reyne de Fraunce, Edward, par memes la grace, Roy de Engleterre, saluz & bon amur.
Ma Dame, de co ke vus nus avez maunde en dreit de vostre bosoigne, d'unt vus avez fet homage al Roy de Alemaigne, e d'unt le Roy de Sicile vus devent vostre droit, ke cele bosoigne ne se prent mie par voie de pees, sicome nus desirames, e en la quel bosoigne vus nus avez requis ke nus vus eydoms; Saciez Dame ke nus vus sumes tenuz a eyder, & voluntiers le feroms.
E en droit de co ke vus nus avez maundee, ke nus vus faceom a savoir quel ayde nus vus feroms; vos fesons a savoir, ma Dame, ke nus vus aiderons de nostre gent en tieu manere, ke vus vus tendrez apaie par reson.
E vus, si vus plest, nus fetes a savoir le lieu & le jour ke vus ferez vostre somounse, ke nus i puissons enveer nostre gent; kar nus avons graunt desir de fere quan ke nus poons pur vus, com pur nostre chiere Taunt.
A Dieu Dame, ke vus garde.
Donees a Sooton le Vintime jour de Septembre, le an de nostre Regne uitisme.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Edward promises his aunt to send her a fighting force when she is ready to move against her brother-in-law, Charles of Anjou, in pursuit of her inheritance in Provence and notes that she has done hommage to the King of Germany for it.  The letter is in French.  This may be the promise he later begged off saying he had to deal with Wales first, CF ep.235 (536.html)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>Rymer, Foedera, 1.2.188 (3rd ed.).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1280