---
letter_id: "24264"
title: "A letter from Edward I (1281)"
ititle: "a letter from edward i (1281)"
ltr_date: "1281"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/557.html"
senders:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21314.html
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Edward to that queen.  We received your letters which you sent us by your cleric, Father De Frez, Tuesday before St. Andrew.
In which you entreated us who with your other friends had promised you their help to claim your right in Provence, and since you intended to make your summons at Lyons the first week of May, [you wished] to know what help we intended to give you:
To which thing, my lady, we answer that we intend to send armed men to Lyons at the time you specified to serve you; let them not fail, my lady, we entreat you, [to find] that you will always be found [to accept] moderation, if it happens that some one will offer it to you; and for this we also entreat the king of Sicily, and the prince our cousin, by the nearness of blood which is between you and the prince.
Dated at Westminster, 26th November, the 10th year of our reign.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ed. al eidem Reginae.
Nous recumes vos lettres, les queles nous vous enviastes, par Peres de Frez votre Clerk, le mardi prochain venant la sent Andreu;
En les queles nous vous priastes, que cum vos autres amis vous eussent promis leur eyde a demander vestre dreit de Provence, & vous entendissez fere votre Somounse, a Lyon la premiere Semeyne de May, ke nous vous feissons a savoir quel eyde nous vous entendissons a fere:
A la queu chose, ma Dame, nous vous responnons ke nous au terme, ke nous vous avez maunde, entendons envoier a Lyons gens a armes pur vous servir; ne quident, ma Dame, nous vous prions ke vous ferez trouvez tus jurs en mesure, se il avient ke om le vous offra; & de ceste chose mesme prions nous le Roy de Sesille, & le Prince notre Cosin, par la prochenete de sanc, qui est entre vous & le Prince.
Donnee a Westm. 26 jur de Novembre, l'an de nostre Regne 10.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Edward assures his aunt he will support her claims in Provence with an armed force as he has promised.  The letter is in French.  Note also a letter from Edward to Charles of Anjou about resolving the issue between him and Marguerite (1.2.196, 3rd ed.), in which he refers to her claims in Provence and Forcalquier, claims which are shared by his mother (Eleanor); he announces that he is sending the aid she asked, reminds Charles of their family bonds and asks him to assume a humility that is appropriate to the powerful and offer a moderate solution (mensura) to the queen.  If it is offered, Edward undertakes to persuade her to accept it and says the pope will also help to end the conflict peacefully.  Edward also wrote to the pope, asking him to help (Rymer, 1.2.197).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera,</em> 1.2.196 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1281