---
letter_id: "24265"
title: "A letter from Edward I, king of England (1282)"
ititle: "a letter from edward i, king of england (1282)"
ltr_date: "1282"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/558.html"
senders:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most serene lady and his dearest aunt, lady Marguerite, illustrious queen of France by the grace of God, Edward, by that same grace king of England, lord of Ireland and duke of Aquitaine, greetings, with continual increase of sincere love.
On the feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, we were given to understand that your summons for the first week of the coming month of May on the affair of your Provence, has been delayed.  About which we affectionately request and ask your serenity to let us know the truth and certainty of that business, if it please you, so that we may know if it is so or not.  And if it is not, then we will make you the subsidy we promised you.
Given at Chichester, 12th of February, the tenth year of our reign.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Serenissime domine et amite sue karissime, domine Margarete Dei gratia regine Francie illustri, Edwardus, eadem gratia rex Anglie, dominus Hibernie et dux Aquitanie, salutem, cum sincere dilectionis continuis incrementis. In festo Purificationis beate Marie Virginis ubi eramus, datum erat nobis intelligi quod mandatum per vos vocatum ad primam ebdomadam instantis mensis maii, super facto vestre Provincie, jam existit prorogatum. Quocirca serenitatem vestram affectuose requirimus et rogamus quatinus veritatem et certitudinem negocii illius nobis, si placet, significetis ut sciamus si sit ita, vel non. Et si non sit ita, tum subsidium quod vobis promisimus....faciemus. Datum apud Cyrencestriam, XII die februarii, anno regni nostri decimo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king asks the dowager queen if she is delaying her expedition to assert her claims to Provence, but promising to send the promised aid if she is going ahead with it.  One assumes he was hoping to be let off the hook, since he later begged off because of troubles in Wales (see CF, ep.235, 536.html).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre,</em> ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.297, ep.233</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1282