---
letter_id: "24266"
title: "A letter from Edward I (1295)"
ititle: "a letter from edward i (1295)"
ltr_date: "1295"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/559.html"
senders:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most serene lady and his dearest friend, lady Marguerite, by the grace of God illustrious queen of the French, Edward, by the same grace, etc., [sends] greetings with sincere love, [and] ready desire to please.
Desiring to hear good news about your state, may the Lord always keep it healthy, we ask your excellence and request that you make us certain about your state as soon as the opportunity offers.
And to satisfy your desire about our state, your highness should know that by the grace of God we enjoy the benefit of full health; which we desire and wish to hear often about/from your serenity.
Dated at Westminster, 12th day of August.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Serenissimae Dominae, & Amitae suae carissimae, Dominae Margaretae, Dei gratia, Reginae Francorum illustri, Edwardus, eadem gratia, &c. salutem, cum dilectione sincera, promptam voluntatem ad grata.
Desiderantes de statu vestro, quem Dominus semper salubrem efficiat, prosperos audire rumores, Excellentiam vestram requirimus, & rogamus quatinus, super eodem statu vestro, quotiens vobis oportunitas aderit, nos velitis reddere certiores.
Ut igitur de Statu nostro vestris desideriis satisfiat, vestrae Celsitudini innotescat quod, per Dei gratiam, plenae gaudemus beneficio sospitatis; quod de Serenitate vestra frequenter audire cupimus, & optamus.
Dat. apud Westm. 12 die Augusti.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Edward asks about his aunt's health. In 1296, Edward wrote to the archbishop of Canterbury, requesting him to have masses and other prayers said for his aunt's soul within his jurisdiction; he sent the same letter to more than a dozen English bishops (<em>Foedera</em>, 2.836).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em> 1.3.147 (3rd ed.)</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1295