---
letter_id: "23766"
title: "A letter from Gerbert of Aurillac [later archbishop of Reims and pope Sylvester II] (983)"
ititle: "a letter from gerbert of aurillac [later archbishop of reims and pope sylvester ii] (983)"
ltr_date: "983"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-13"
url: "/letter/56.html"
senders:
  - id: 21350
    name: Gerbert of Aurillac [later archbishop of Reims and pope Sylvester II]
    iname: gerbert of aurillac [later archbishop of reims and pope sylvester ii]
    type: people
    url: /people/21350.html
receivers:
  - id: 19
    name: Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress
    iname: adelaide of burgundy, ottonian empress
    type: woman
    url: /woman/19.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his lady, always empress, Adelaide, G[erbert].
We have carried out completely the wishes of our lord [the emperor] and yours in part, about the benefices and leases.  Let my lady remember that she hinted to her servant that she would pray for many things other than can be done.  Since we left you we have not seen Grifo nor his messenger.  The land which we conceded to our faithful yesterday, how can we take it away tomorrow?  But if all things which all order are done, what do we do here, and if we give all, what do we hold?  To Grifo, if we can, we will concede no benefice.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Domine sue Adalaidi semper auguste G.
De beneficiis et libellariis ex parte vestrum velle, ex toto domini nostri exsecuti sumus. Recordetur domina mea, quid innuerit servo suo se oraturam pro pluribus aliter, quam fieri possit. Ex quo a vobis discessimus, nec Grifonem nec eius nuntium vidimus. Terram, quam nostris fidelibus heri concessimus, cras quomodo auferemus? At si omnia, que omnes iubent, fiunt, quid hic facimus, et si totum damus, quid tenebimus? Griphoni, ubi possimus, beneficium nullum concedemus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Gerbert asserts his prerogative not to do everything the empress asked in the way of benefices, though he has done what the emperor wanted.  He implies that her demands are excessive and presumably there is a question of jurisdiction.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH BDKz 2, ep.6 p.28-29; also in PL139 ep.6 c203 (with two differences, <em>nostrum velle</em> for <em>vestrum velle</em> and<em> ex voto</em> for<em> ex toto</em>).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>983