---
letter_id: "24271"
title: "A letter from Gregory IX (04/04/1237)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory ix (04/04/1237)"
ltr_date: "04/04/1237"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-15"
url: "/letter/564.html"
senders:
  - id: 21364
    name: Gregory IX
    iname: gregory ix
    type: people
    url: /people/21364.html
receivers:
  - id: 74
    name: Agnes of Prague
    iname: agnes of prague
    type: woman
    url: /woman/74.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the abbess of the monastery of St. Francis of Prague of the order of St. Damian, greetings and apostolic blessing.
Since having left behind the vanity of the world, you have turned human fragility into perpetual stability, and entered in perpetuity the way of perfection in holy religion to which you devoted yourself, having voluntarily from a queen made yourself the handmaid of almighty God, thinking all your joy and comfort to be in divine services, especially when the most holy body of Christ is offered on the altar, we indulge your prayers, bending to your devotion, with the authority of the presents, that for five years you may hear the solemnities of the mass in the choir of the monastery and see the priest celebrating [them].
Dated at Viterbo, 2nd nones of April, in the 11th year of our pontificate.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Abbatissae Monasterii Sancti Francisci Pragensis Ordinis Sancti Damiani Salutem, & Apostolicam Benedictionem.
Cum seculi vanitate relicta, fragilitatem humanam in stabilitatem perpetuam commutaveris; & ex Regina facta voluntarie Dei Omnipotentis ancilla perfectionis viam in sancta Religione, cui te devovisti, perpetuo sis ingressa; omne gaudium tuum, & solamen reputans in Divinis obsequiis, maxime cum in Altari offertur Sanctissimum Corpus Christi; tuis supplicationibus inclinati devotioni tuae auctoritate praesentium indulgemus, ut quinquies in anno in Choro Monasterii audire possis Missarum Solemnia, & inspicere Presbyterum celebrantem.
Datum Viterbii II. Nonas Aprilis Pontificatus Nostri Anno Undecimo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope, praising Agnes's choice of life and devotion to that choice, grants her request to be present in the choir for the celebration of the mass and the consecration of the Eucharist.
Dated at Viterbo 2nd nones of April, 11th year.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Bullarium Franciscanum Romanorum Pontificum,</em> ed. J. H. Sbaralea, 1 (Rome: Sacrae Congregationis de Propaganda Fide, 1759, repr. Santa Maria degli Angeli: Proziuncola, 1983), 213, ep.222.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>04/04/1237