---
letter_id: "23768"
title: "A letter from Gerbert of Aurillac, archbishop of Reims (995/996)"
ititle: "a letter from gerbert of aurillac, archbishop of reims (995/996)"
ltr_date: "995/996"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/58.html"
senders:
  - id: 21351
    name: Gerbert of Aurillac, archbishop of Reims
    iname: gerbert of aurillac, archbishop of reims
    type: people
    url: /people/21351.html
receivers:
  - id: 19
    name: Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress
    iname: adelaide of burgundy, ottonian empress
    type: woman
    url: /woman/19.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Often wondering to myself where faith, truth, piety, and justice made their dwelling, only your piety and majesty answered, whom multiple virtue has always inhabited and possessed.  To you therefore as a special temple of mercy I flee a suppliant and ask your help and always beneficial counsel.  For since . . . bitter things murmur against me and they seek my life with blood.  Added to the heap of evils . . . She also rages, who should be my solace, Rome.  I pray therefore and beseech that your kingdoms grow milder by your imperial rule.  I, completely and everywhere yours, await your investigation and alleviation.  And this only is certain, that we wish to follow what would please you.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Sepenumero mecum reputans ubinam fides, veritas, pietas et iustitia domicilium sibi fecerint, vestra solum pietas, maiestas occurrere potuit, quam virtus multiplex semper inhabitavit atque possedit. Ad vos ergo tanquam speciale templum misericordie supplex confugio vestrumque semper salubre consilium et auxilium reposco. Quia enim . . ., in me unum acerba fremunt vitamque cum sanguine poscunt. Additur ad malorum cumulum . . . Sevit et ipsa, que solatio debuit esse, Roma. Oro ergo et deprecor, vestra vestro imperio mitescant regna. Ego quippe totus ubique vester vestrum expecto examen et levamen. Idque solum certum est nos sequi velle, quod vobis constiterit placuisse.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Gerbert seeks the empress's protection, presumably from his enemies in Reims.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH BDKz 2, ep.204, p.246; also HGF10 ep.96 p.421, same text
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>995/996