---
letter_id: "24290"
title: "A letter from Gregory IX (12/02/1234)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory ix (12/02/1234)"
ltr_date: "12/02/1234"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-18"
url: "/letter/583.html"
senders:
  - id: 21364
    name: Gregory IX
    iname: gregory ix
    type: people
    url: /people/21364.html
receivers:
  - id: 75
    name: Clare of Assisi
    iname: clare of assisi
    type: woman
    url: /woman/75.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his beloved daughters in Christ, the abbess and enclosed nuns of the order of St. Damian of Assisi, greetings, and apostolic blessing.
We willingly give that special protection of favor to those seeking heavenly things, having abandoned earthly things with contempt, which we feel produces the grace of peace and quiet in them.  For which reason, beloved daughters in Christ, we grant you by the authority of the presents that you can not be summoned through apostolic letters by anyone unless they make express mention of this kind of indulgence and of your order.  To no one, therefore, is it permitted to violate this page of our decree, or to oppose it by daring boldness; if any should presume to attempt it, let him know that he will incur the indignation of almighty God and the blessed apostles Peter and Paul.
Dated at Perugia on the 4th nones of December, in the 8th year of our pontificate.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilectis in Christo, filiabus Abbatissae, & Monialibus inclusis Ordinis Sancti Damiani de Assiso Salutem,& Apostolicam Benedictionem.
Coelestia quaerentibus, terrenis contemptui derelictis, libenter illud speciale favoris presidium impendimus, quod eis pacis, & quietis producere gratiam sentiamus. Eapropter, dilectae in Christo filiae, praesentium vobis auctoritate concedimus, ut a quoquam conveniri per litteras Apostolicas non possitis, nisi de indulgentia hujusmodi, & Ordine vestro expressam fecerint mentionem. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae Concessionis infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire; si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit, indignationem Omnipotentis Dei, ac Beatorum Petri, & Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum.
Datum Perusii quarto Nonas Decembris, Pontificatus Nostri Anno Octavo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope grants the nuns protection of freedom from certain kinds of oversight, though it is not clear exactly what kind is meant.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Bullarium Franciscanum Romanorum Pontificum</em>, ed. J. H. Sbaralea, 1 (Rome: Sacrae Congregationis de Propaganda Fide, 1759, repr. Santa Maria degli Angeli: Proziuncola, 1983), 143, ep.150.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>12/02/1234