---
letter_id: "24292"
title: "A letter from Gregory IX (1234)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory ix (1234)"
ltr_date: "1234"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-18"
url: "/letter/585.html"
senders:
  - id: 21364
    name: Gregory IX
    iname: gregory ix
    type: people
    url: /people/21364.html
receivers:
  - id: 75
    name: Clare of Assisi
    iname: clare of assisi
    type: woman
    url: /woman/75.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his beloved daughters in Christ, the abbess and enclosed nuns of the monastery of St. Mary of Foligno, greetings and apostolic blessing.
What is recognized to be fitting to religion and decency is often sought from us; it is fitting that we grant with willing spirit support to the desires of those seeking what is appropriate.  So, expecting it to be improper and absurd if you, who rejecting not only your possessions but also yourselves have chosen to live healthily enclosed in body that you might serve God with a free mind, should be subject to the weight of any charge, we firmly prohibit by the authority of the present that anyone should presume to exact or extort a toll from you on those things which are purchased for your maintenance.
To no one, therefore, is it permitted to violate this page of our decree, or to oppose it by daring boldness; if any should presume to attempt it, let him know that he will incur the indignation of almighty God and the blessed apostles Peter and Paul.
Dated at Perugia, 11th ides of December in the 8th year of our pontificate.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilectis in Christo filiabus...Abbatissae, ac Monialibus inclusis Monasterii Sanctae Mariae Fulginat. Salutem, & Apostolicam Benedictionem.
Quoties a Nobis petitur, quod religioni, & honestati convenire dignoscitur; animo Nos decet libenti concedere, & petentium desideriis congruum suffragium impertiri. Attendentes itaque satis esse indecens, & absurdum, si vos, quae non solum vestra, sed etiam vosmetipsas salubriter abnegantes elegistis habitare conclusae corpore, ut mente libera Domino serviatis; alicujus exactionis oneri, contingeret subjacere, auctoritate praesentium firmiter inhibemus, ne quis a vobis de his, quae pro sustentationae, vestra per Ducatum Spoletan emuntur, pedagium exigere, vel extorquere praesumat. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae & inhibitionis infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit indignationem Omnipotentis Dei, ae Beatorum Petri, & Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum.
Datum Perusii II. Idus Decembris Pontificatus Nostri Anno Octavo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope exempts the monastery from payment of tolls/taxes on anything bought for them.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Bullarium Franciscanum Romanorum Pontificum,</em> ed. J. H. Sbaralea, 1 (Rome: Sacrae Congregationis de Propaganda Fide, 1759, repr. Santa Maria degli Angeli: Proziuncola, 1983), 143, ep.151.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1234