---
letter_id: "24295"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Provence (1244-45)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of provence (1244-45)"
ltr_date: "1244-45"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-11-07"
url: "/letter/588.html"
senders:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To her most excellent and reverend lord, Henry, by the grace of God illustrious king of England, lord of Ireland, duke of Normandy, Aquitaine, and count of Anjou, his most humble consort and most devoted Eleanor, by that same grace queen of England, greetings and owed subjection with all reverence.
We make known to your lordship that by the grace of God we and our children are healthy and well, which we want you to know with all the affection of heart and spirit; and we impart to your majesty that the elect of Canterbury sent us his messengers with letters on a day past and let us know by them that he had learned from certain people that we had been moved against him over the episcopacy of Chichester, and he asked that we be neither angry about it, nor turned against him.  We let him know through messengers and our letters that it was no wonder if we were moved against him since he had offended you over this, nor could he gain our benevolence in any way as long as he suffered your indignation.
Having heard and understood these things, he came to us in person, telling us that he would satisfy your will over said matters and all others, as far as he could.  We persuaded him that he must satisfy your will if he wished to quiet our indignation; since while discord lasted between you and him, our wrath or indignation against him would not in any way abate.   We therefore beg your most excellent lordship with all the affection we can, that you deign to let us know your state, may God make it prosperous and happy, and the pleasure of your will over this, quickly, if it please you.
May your excellence always be well in the Lord.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Excellentissimo ac reverendisimo domino suo Henrico, Dei gratia regi Angliae illustri, domino Hiberniae, duci Normanniae Aquitaniae, et comiti Andegaviae, sua humillima consors et devotissima Alianora, eadem gratia regina Angliae, salutem et debitam cum omni reverntia subjectionem.
Dominationi vestrae notum facimus nos per Dei gratiam et liberos nostros sanos esse et incolumes, quod de vobis scire toto cordis et animi affectu desideramus; regiae majestati vestrae significantes quod electus Cantuariensis praeterita die nuntios suos cum literis suis nobis destinavit, et per ipsos nobis significavit, quod quorundam relatu didicerat nos pro facto suo de episcopatu Cycestrensi contra ipsum fuisse commotas, et petiit quod super hoc non molestaremur, nec contra ipsum moveremur. Cui per nuntios et literas nostras significavimus, quod non fuit mirum si contra ipsum moveremur, cum vos super hoc offendisset, nec posset aliquo modo nostram habere benevolentiam, dummodo vestram sustineret indignationem. Quibus etiam auditis et intellectis, in propria persona ad nos accessit, nobis significans quod super praedictis et omnibus aliis vestram pro posse suo adimpleret voluntatem. Cui persuasimus quod vestram adimpleret voluntatem si nostram vellet sedare indignationem; quia dum discordia inter vos et ipsum duraret, nostram iram nec indignationem eidem nullo modo remitteremus. Excellentissimae igitur dominationi vestrae omni qua possumus affectione supplicamus, quatenus statum vestrum, quem Deus prosperum faciat et felicem, et vestrae voluntatis beneplacitum nobis crebo, si placet, significare dignemini. Valeat excellentia vestra semper in Domino.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Boniface of Savoy, Eleanor's uncle, appointed three years earlier Archbishop of Canterbury, arrived in England in 1244 and was immediately involved in a dispute with the king over the election of the bishop of Chichester.  The king had urged someone (Robert Passelewe) on the chapter who was found by Boniface's appointed representatives to be unsuitable.  Boniface had not only rejected him, but had suggested some one else whom the chapter elected and the archbishop confirmed.  Henry was furious, but was apparently mollifed by the queen's letter taking his side, and according to Matthew Paris (Chronica Majora 4.509-10) was persuaded by her that his man was more valuable in his current secular position (see Howell, 41-43).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Royal and Other Historical Letters Illustrative of the Reign of Henry III,</em> ed. W.W. Shirley (London: Longman et al., 1866), ep.447, 2.42-3, also in <em>Adae de Marisco Epistolae</em>, ed. J.S. Brewer (London: Longman et al, 1858), RBMAS, CM, <em>Monumenta Franciscana II</em>, Appendix 31, p.629-30.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1244-45