---
letter_id: "23716"
title: "A letter from Constance, countess of Toulouse (1164)"
ititle: "a letter from constance, countess of toulouse (1164)"
ltr_date: "1164"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-04"
url: "/letter/6.html"
senders:
  - id: 3
    name: Constance of France, countess of Toulouse
    iname: constance of france, countess of toulouse
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21455
    name: Louis VII, King of France
    iname: louis vii, king of france
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To Louis, by the grace of God, most high king of France, her dearest lord and brother, C[onstance] his only sister, greetings and enjoyment of the fruit of continuous life.  Let it not be unknown to you that this knight, Berengar of Puiserguier, loves my welfare and that of your nephews very much.  Since his enemies attempt to injure him, he comes to you whose authority he has always claimed.  For this reason I ask your indulgence, if he seeks anything justly from you, that he feel the power of my prayer to have availed him.  As his neighbors testify, he ought to hold his castle from your hand with no one mediating.
Fare well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ludovico, Dei gratia altissimo Regi Franciae, carissimo domino et fratri suo, C. ejus unica soror, salutes et fructum perennis vitae consequi. Non ignotum sit vobis, istum militem Berengarium de Podio-Serguerio nomine utilitatem meam et nepotum vestrorum valde diligere. Quoniam hostes ejus ei injuriam inferre moliuntur, ad vos, cujus vocem semper clamavit, venit. Hac de causa libertatem vestram rogo, ut, si a vobis aliquid juste petierit, deprecationis meae opem sibi prodesse et valere sentiat. Ut ejus vicini testantur, castrum suum nullo mediante de manu vestra debet tenere. Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Constance writes in support of a man, Berengar, who wishes to be released from service to Ermengard of Narbonne. (See also Ermengarde, HGF16, ep.275 [<em>Epistolae</em>, 15.html]and William of Montpellier, ep.276, who oppose the move; Raymond, duke of Narbonne, ep.277, who favors it; and a letter from Berengar to the king, ep.279).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF16 ep.278, p.91.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1164