---
letter_id: "23771"
title: "A letter from Liutold, bishop of Augsburg (989-96) (989-996)"
ititle: "a letter from liutold, bishop of augsburg (989-96) (989-996)"
ltr_date: "989-996"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/61.html"
senders:
  - id: 21451
    name: Liutold, bishop of Augsburg (989-96)
    iname: liutold, bishop of augsburg (989-96)
    type: people
    url: /people/21451.html
receivers:
  - id: 19
    name: Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress
    iname: adelaide of burgundy, ottonian empress
    type: woman
    url: /woman/19.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To Adelaide, glorious empress, Liutold, raised with divine help to the honor of pontifex, devoted prayers with service.
Desiring peace of worthy quiet for the church of God committed to us, as it fitting, when we began to establish the monastery of St. Magnus, a messenger of count Sicco came to us suddenly and reported that Sicco had barely returned in flight from that region.  For Hugo, with the bond of faithful peace disrupted  everywhere, wishing wickedly to renew the goads of war, permitted no men devoted to your authority and will to leave unharmed.  You must examine this in every way to see what kind of help can be given in strife of this kind.
Fare well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Adalheide imperatrici gloriose Liutoldus divino iuvamine pontificatus honore sublimatus preces iugiter cum famulatu devotas.
Pacema digne quietis ecclesie Dei nobis commisse cupientes, ut decet, stabilire monasterium sancti Magni cum fuimus ingressi nuntius comitis Sicconis redeuntis de Italia occurrit nobis improvise, qui fatebatur ipsum Sicconem vix fuga revulsum fuisse de illa regione. Nam Hugo vinculo fide pacis undique disrupto belligerationis inique stimulos renovare volens nullos vestre ditionis viros voluntatisque devotos suo libitu permittit inde inlesos discedere. Hoc vobis omnimodis est trutinandum, qualiter istius modi discordiis sit subveniendum. Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Liutold reports hostile actions in his area against Adelaide's people.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>MGH Tegernsee ep.99 p.103
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>989-996