---
letter_id: "23772"
title: "A letter from the brothers of Feuchtwang (991-993)"
ititle: "a letter from the brothers of feuchtwang (991-993)"
ltr_date: "991-993"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-05-13"
url: "/letter/62.html"
senders:
  - id: 21581
    name: the brothers of Feuchtwang
    iname: the brothers of feuchtwang
    type: people
    url: /people/21581.html
receivers:
  - id: 19
    name: Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress
    iname: adelaide of burgundy, ottonian empress
    type: woman
    url: /woman/19.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the lofty lady, most noble sustainer of kings and kingdoms, empress Adelaide, always unconquered, entitled to the highest greeting in Christ the saviour, the brothers of Feuchtwang newly congregated in the service of the church. 

Like all the congregations of the faithful, we are not ignorant of the memory of your piety which is always before us, and desiring that you know the humble name of the church of great God the saviour, we also make known to you our monastic purpose newly undertaken in that place, so that, protected by the shadow of your rule from now on, we may be safe from the tumults of secular attacks.  We believe this church will be very blessed if we deserve to have in our time so benign a mother, and we think the parish of the monks fortunate to serve under such a defender with zeal for monomachy,(1) whose wit is augmented by such broad wisdom that she subjugates the whole empire to herself.  Motivated by the security of this great hope, we do not cease to pray day and night for the endurance and stability of your reign.  Moreover, we earnestly request in prayers that Christ grant to the blessed spirits of our emperors the pleasure of the heavenly Elysium.

Fare well.


<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Domine precelse regum regnorumque altrici nobilissime Adalheide auguste semper invictissime fratres Phyuhtvuangensis ecclesie servicio noviter congregati titulum summe salutacionis in Christo salvatore. 

Cum omnes fidelium congregaciones vestre pietatis memoriae non ignoramus iugiter esse presentes, humile nomen ecclesie magni Dei salvatoris vos etiam nosse cupientes nostrumque monachile propositum in eodem loco nuperrime degere incipientium vobis equum duximus intimandum ut umbra dominationis vestre deinceps protecti tumultus secularium inpulsionum sufferre valeamus securi. Ecclesiam igitur credimus nimium fore beatam, si eius matrem nostro tempore habere meremur tam benignam, felices esse arbitrantes monachorum plebes sub tali defensatrice monomachie studio deservientes, cuius solum ingenium tam larga est sapientia auctum, ut sibii totum subiugaret imperium.  Huius magne spei securitate animate pro diuturnitate seu stabilimine vestri regni die noctuque non cessamus Deo supplicare. Beatis insuper spiritibus imperatorum nostrorum amoenitatem celestis Elisii iugi precamione a Christo deposcimus concedi.  Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The brothers ask the empress's protection.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)  The word "monomachie" should refer to single combat, but it may also involve a pun on the word for monk, "monachus," suggesting someone who battles for or as a monastic.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH <em>Tegernsee</em> ep.1 p.2-3; also in PL137 ep.1 c.9, among the letters of Wigo, deacon of Feuchtwang, who may be responsible for it; same text, with some typographical errors and without one larga.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>991-993