---
letter_id: "23773"
title: "A letter from Emma, queen of the Franks, her daughter (980's)"
ititle: "a letter from emma, queen of the franks, her daughter (980's)"
ltr_date: "980's"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-16"
url: "/letter/63.html"
senders:
  - id: 21322
    name: Emma, queen of the Franks, her daughter
    iname: emma, queen of the franks, her daughter
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 19
    name: Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress
    iname: adelaide of burgundy, ottonian empress
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To Adelaide, mother, empress always imperial, Emma, queen of the Franks, greetings.  Though there is great distance between our lands, yet I ask for help as a daughter from her mother.  Duke Hugh has by plots turned not only the princes of our kingdom away from loyalty to us, but tries even to turn my brother Otto against us; that is why he went to Rome.  Lest he exult in the success of his desire, I, daughter, beseech [you] mother, to keep such an enemy from returning.  And if it is possible, either hold him captive or let him not return unpunished.  But lest the evador elude you by his tricks, I have taken care to indicate all the inseparable accidents of his form.
[Here she listed various particulars of his physical makeup, eyes, ears, tongues, teeth, and nose, but Richer does not quote them.]
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Adelaidi matri, imperatrici semper augustae, Emma Francorum regina salutem. Licet multo terrarum interstitio semota, tamen a matre auxilii rationem filia peto. Hugo dux insidiis non solum regni nostri principes a nostra fidelitate amovit, sed et fratrem meum Ottonem a nobis conatur avertere; inde et Romam illum adiit. Ne ergo penitus sui voti comos glorietur, peto supplex filia matrem, ut in revertendo tantus hostis impediatur; et si fieri potest, aut captus teneatur, aut impunis non redeat. Sed ne vos suis dolis tergiversator evadat, totius formae illius inseparabilia accidentia vobis indicare curavi.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>In this letter, written while her husband Lothar was still alive, Emma asks her mother to intervene to capture duke Hugh [Capet] on his way back from Rome where he had met with the emperor Otto II and the pope.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH SS 3, <em>Richeri Historia Libri IIII</em>, 3.87, p.626.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>980's