---
letter_id: "24358"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Provence (1265)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of provence (1265)"
ltr_date: "1265"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/651.html"
senders:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21539
    name: public, to all who will see
    iname: public, to all who will see
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Eleanor, by the grace of God queen of England, lady of Ireland and duchess of Aquitaine, to all who will see the present letters, greetings.  Know that we have received in our Wardrobe from the mayor, the community, and the men of the priory of St. George of Oleron, 124 Poitevin pounds by the hand of Fulco Richard the younger, a townsman of Oleron, from the sum of pounds which they freely promised to us, for the help of our lord the king and our dearest son Edward.
In witness of which we have caused these our letters patent to be made.
Dated at St. Macarius, February 13th, in the 49th year of the reign of our lord King Henry.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Alienora Dei gratia, Regina Angliae, Domina Hiberniae, & Ducissa Aquit.  Universis praesentes litteras inspecturis salutem.
Noveritis nos recepisse in Warderoba nostra a Majore, communia, & hominibus Prioris Sancti Georgii de Olerone, sex viginti & quatuor libras Pictaven. per manum Fulcon. Richardi junioris Burgen. Oleron. de summa librarum, quas ipsi nobis ex gratia promiserant, pro succursu faciendo Domino nostro Regi, et Edwardo Filio nostro karissimo.
In cujus rei testimonium has nostras litteras fieri fecimus Patentes.
Dat. apud Sanctum macharium, 13 die Febr. anno Regni Regis H. Domini nostri 49.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Eleanor publicly acknowledges a payment from Oleron to aid the royal cause when the king and prince were held by Simon de Montfort.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.2.93 (3rd ed.)</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1265