---
letter_id: "24359"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Provence (1265)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of provence (1265)"
ltr_date: "1265"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/652.html"
senders:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21539
    name: public, to all who will see
    iname: public, to all who will see
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Eleanor by the grace of God queen of England, lady of Ireland, duchess of Aquitaine, to all who will see the present letters, greetings in the eternal Lord.
Know that the mayor and the community and the men of the prior of St. George of Oleron, for help to our lord King and our dearest son Edward, have spontaneously granted us 390 Poitevin pounds, as the only debt they will be held to:
so that they can bear no disadvantage from their courtesy, we promise them that the loan of this kind of aid will have no consequences for them or their successors;
nor by our said lord King and Edward, or their successors, will any further debt be exacted from that mayor, community, and men of said prior, by reason of the aforesaid aid.
In witness of which we have caused these our letters patent to be made.
Dated at St. macharius, February 14th, in the 49th year of the reign of our lord King Henry.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>A. Dei gratia, Regina Angliae, Domina Hiberniae, & Ducissa Aquit. Universis, praesentes litteras inspecturis, salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Noveritis quod dilecti nobis Major, & Communia, ac homines Prioris Sancti Georgii de Olerone, nobis pro succursu faciendo Domino nostro Regi & Edwardo Filio nostro karissimo trescentas, quater viginti, & decem libras monetae Pictaven. voluntate spontanea, concesserunt, cum ad hoc ex debito minime tenerentur:
Ut igitur ex curialitate sua nullum possint incommodum reportare, promittimus eisdem quod hujusmodi succursus praestatio, eis vel eorum successoribus ad consequentiam non trahetur;
Nec a dictis Domino nostro Rege & Edwardo, vel eorum Successoribus ab ipsis Majore, Communia & hominibus dicti Prioris, ratione succursus praedicti, aliquid ex debito in posterum exigetur.
In cujus rei testimonium has nostras litteras fieri fecimus patentes.
Dat. apud Sanctum Macharium, 14 die Febr. anno Regni Regis H. Domini nostri 49.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Eleanor publicly acknowledges a payment from Oleron to aid the royal cause.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.450 (2nd ed.805)</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1265