---
letter_id: "24360"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Provence (1273)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of provence (1273)"
ltr_date: "1273"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/653.html"
senders:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/76.html
receivers:
  - id: 21375
    name: Hamo Hauteyn, Justice
    iname: hamo hauteyn, justice
    type: people
    url: /people/21375.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Eleanor, by the grace of God, Queen of England, etc., to her dear Hamo Hauteyn, Justice, etc., with sincere affection, greetings:
We are apprised by the Warden of our Hospital of St. Katherine by the Tower of London, that you have caused the lands and rents of Reynham, in the County of Kent, which by our bestowal belong to the said Hospital, to be taken into the King's hand on account of a certain debt of Reginald de Cornhull in Jewry, so that it is not possible for the Master of our said Hospital to lay hand upon them; wherefore We make instant request to you, that for love of Us you respite all debts and demands affecting our said Hospital on Jewish account until the feast of St. Michael, and so we shall be holden to you in especial gratitude.  Farewell.
Given at Lecthon on the 22nd day of June.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The queen asks a royal justice, presumably one "assigned to the custody of the Jews," as in the previous writ of king Edward, to temporarily suspend the debts that affect her grant to the Hospital of St. Katherine. The text printed in the Calendar is an English translation. Eleanor's financial dealings are discussed in detail by Margaret Howell in "The Resources of Eleanor of Provence as Queen Consort," <em>English Historical Review</em> 102 (1987), 372-93.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Calendar of the Plea Rolls of the Exchequer of the Jews</em>, ed. J.M. Rigg (Edinburgh: Ballantyne, Hanson, 1910), 2.65-6, Membrane 14d.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1273