---
letter_id: "24364"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Provence (1282)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of provence (1282)"
ltr_date: "1282"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/657.html"
senders:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21311
    name: Edward I
    iname: edward i
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Eleanor, by the grace of God, Queen of England, to our dear son the King, greetings and our blessing.
We need your entreaty to the king of France that he help us to achieve our right in the matter that concerns us in the land of Provence.
We have had a letter made on your part which we send you and entreat you to hear it and, if it pleases you, to put your seal on it; and if not, have it emended to your pleasure and send it quickly to your aunt, my Lady of France.
And we also entreat you to send, by letter, to master Bonet your clerk, to show and advance this case in the court of France, as best he can.
We commend you to God.
Dated at Waltham, July 8th.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Alianore, par la grace de Dieu, Roine d'Engleterre, a nostre chere filz, le Roy, saluz & nostre benoyzon.
Nos avons mestiere de vestre Prier au Roi de France, que il nous soit aidant a porchacer nostre droiture en la partie, qui apartient a noz en la terre de Provence:
Nos avoms fet fere une lettre de par vos, la quele nous vo envoions, & voz prioms, que vos la vuillez oir, si ele vos plest, & facez la seler; & si non, voillez commander que ele soit emendee a vestre plesir, & per vos soit tost envoiee a vestre Autele ma Dame de France.
Et vos, prioms onkere que voz voillez mander, par vestre lettre, a Mestre Bonet vestre Clerc, que il voille mostrer, & avancer ceste bosoigne en la Court de France, a meuz que il porra.
A Dieu voz commendons.
Donees a Wautham 8. jor de Juyll.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Eleanor and her older sister, Marguerite, queen of France attempt to enlist Edward's support for their claims in Provence against their brother-in-law, Charles of Anjou.  In this instance, Eleanor has had the letter written for her son and sends it for his approval.  See letters of Marguerite of Provence, Champollion-Figeac epp.150, 199, 226, 297.  The letter is in French.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera,</em> 1.2.206 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1282