---
letter_id: "24366"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Provence (1282)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of provence (1282)"
ltr_date: "1282"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/659.html"
senders:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/76.html
receivers:
  - id: 21311
    name: Edward I
    iname: edward i
    type: people
    url: /people/21311.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Eleanor, by the grace of God, Queen of England, to the King our son, greetings and our blessing.
Because John of Brittany, our son, is in a foreign land and his affairs are commended to us as his mother and you as his lord; all the more that sir John of Maure, his seneschal in England, must go abroad quickly to hear news from his lord; we pray and request that you grant that sir Nicholas of Stapleton may attend to his matters in this country and send to him by letter that he should do so; for he will not do it without your special command; and therefore we entreat you, so that he can, that you make it [publicly] known.
And if it please you, give him the power by your letter to be prepared and have prepared all the complaints, just as you granted to sir Dreu to do; And hold sir John of Maure excused that he does not take leave of you at his departure; for he could not because of his haste.
We commend you to God.
Dated at Lutgershall, October 8th.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Alianor, par la grace de Dieu, Roine d'Engleterre, au Roi nostre filz, saluz & nostre bonoizon.
Por ce que Jehan de Bretagne, nostre filz, est en Estrange pais, & a nos, com a mere, & a vous, com a Seignur, ait fes besoignes recommandez; & de tant plus ke nostre Sire Jehan de Maurre, son Seneschall en Engleterre, doit haitivement aler la Doure por oir certains noveles de son Seignur;
Voz prions, & requerons que voz voillez granter, que mon Sire Nichol de Stapleton peusse entendre a ses bosoignes en cest pays, & voillez maunder a li par vestre lettre que il i entende; kar il ne le f'rait pas saunz vestre commandement especial; & por ce vous en prioms, que il porra bien, oveque les voz, feire les sones.
Et, si vos plest, dones li poair, par vestre lettre, de estre Atorne, & de fere Atorne, ou toz plaiz, en la menere que vos le grantastes a Sire Dieu de fere;
Et aiez excuse Sire Johan de Maurre de ce que il ne prent conge de vous a son partir; kar il ne le poait faire por la haste que il fut.
A Dieu vous commandons.
Donees a Letergetse le 8 jor d'Octobr.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Eleanor asks her son to grant temporary power to a representative of her son-in-law, John of Brittany, while the official seneschal goes to meet his lord.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera,</em> 1.2.211 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1282