---
letter_id: "24367"
title: "A letter from Robert Grosseteste (1244?)"
ititle: "a letter from robert grosseteste (1244?)"
ltr_date: "1244?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-27"
url: "/letter/660.html"
senders:
  - id: 21562
    name: Robert Grosseteste
    iname: robert grosseteste
    type: people
    url: /people/21562.html
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/76.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his most excellent lady Eleanor, by the grace of God illustrious queen of England, lady of Ireland, duchess of Normandy, Aquitaine and countess of Anjou, her devoted Robert, by divine mercy humble minister of the church of Lincoln, [sends] greetings and reverence as devoted as it is owed, with sincere love.
It is written in the book of Wisdom:  "As the sun rising in the heights of God is to the world, so the beauty of a good woman/wife in the ornaments of his house."  But the sun rising dispels the horror of darkness from the world, brings in the happy softness of light, drives away nocturnal fears and turbulence, bestows security and tranquillity, and to encompass many things in a brief word, whatever grows naturally in this visible world, thrives and flourishes, naturally, from the vital warming of the rays of the rising sun in the world.
It is fitting, therefore that the beauty and elegance of your kindness, goodness, and virtue in the adornment of your house, which is particularly the church and kingdom of England, should have similar effects to the rising sun.  By opposing the horror of errors and supplying truth, so the priesthood and kingdom may enjoy the desired tranquillity of peace for all the living, providing most prudently for them to grow and thrive and flourish to completion.  The priesthood, clergy, and also the people of the kingdom of England are most distressed in these times by horrors as if by darkness of night, for reasons which it would be too long to write to you, but which our beloved clerk, the bearer of the presents, could better reveal to you, if it please you, orally.
Now is the place and time for your beauty, as we have said, to disclose its brilliance to the lord king, if it please, persuading him, as befits royal majesty, to cut off the new causes of disturbance that have arisen and not permit them to sprout elsewhere.  But residing "on the threshhold of judgment," as it is written about the good king, he "disperses all evil with his look" [Prov.20:8].  For what he will have done at your persuasion, you will do through him.  Following the example of Esther, the best, most holy and most prudent queen, freeing her people from death to which they were sentenced by royal decree, you would free not only the people but the clergy and priesthood of the kingdom of England from unaccustomed and new distresses through your importuning of the lord king.
May your serenity always be well in the Lord.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Excellentissimae Dominae suae Alionorae, Dei gratia illustri Reginae Angliae, Dominae Hiberniae, Ducissae Normanniae, Aquitaniae, et Comitissae Andegaviae, devotus suus Robertus, miseratione divina Lincolniensis ecclesiae minister humilis, salutem et quam debitam tam devotam cum sincera dilectione reverntiam.
Scriptum est in libro Sapientiae: Sicut sol oriens mundo in altissimis Dei, sic mulieris bonae species in ornamentis domus suae; sol autem oriens mundo tenebrarum propellit horrorem, luminis inducit jocundam suavitatem, nocturnos timores et turbulentias abigit, securitatem et tranquillitatem tribuit, et ut brevi sermone comprehendamus plurima, quicquid naturaliter in hoc mundo visibili viret, viget, et proficit, hoc ex radiorum solis orientis mundo vitali confotione naturaliter suscipit. Igitur vestrae benignitatis, bonitatis, et virtutis decorem et speciem in ornamentis domus vestrae, quae specialiter est ecclesia et regnum Angliae, similia oportet soli orienti efficere; horrorem errorum dissuadendo, veritatem suggerendo, ut optata cunctis mortalibus pacis tranquillitate sacerdotium et regnum perfruantur, prudentissime procurando in qua vireant, vigeant, et proficiant usque ad perfectum; sacerdotio igitur, clero et etiam populo regni Angliae his temporibus quasi noctis tenebrosis horroribus plurimum turbatris, causis quas longum esset vobis scribere, quas dilectus clericus noster, lator praesentium, vobis melius poterit, si placet, voce viva monstrare; nunc locus est et tempus, ut vestra, quam praediximus, species suam promat refulgentiam, domino regi, si placet, suadendo, ut ipse, sicut regiam decet majestatem, exortas turbationum novas causas resecet, nec repullulare de caetero permittat; sed in solio judicii residens, sicut de rege bono scriptum est, omne malum intuitu suo dissipet; quod enim ipse ad vestram suasionem fecerit, vos per ipsum in ipso facietis. Ad instar igitur Hester, optimae, sanctissimae, prudentissimaeque reginae, populum suum morti ex decreto regio addictum de morte liberantis, non solum populum, sed et clerum et sacerdotium regni Angliae de insolitis et novis angustiis per vestram apud dominum regem instantiam liberare curetis. Valeat serenitas vestra semper in Domino.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Robert Grosseteste, a supporter of reform in religion and government, uses biblical imagery and flattery to persuade the queen to influence the king to end the wrongs his people are suffering.  The details of those wrongs are to be revealed not in the letter but by the messenger who carries it, but they are probably connected with clerical opposition to the king's actions in episcopal elections and vacant bishoprics (see Howell, 43-44).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Roberti Grosseteste, Episcopi quondam Lincolniensis, Epistolae,</em> ed. H.R. Luard (London: Longman et al, 1861), RBMAS, CMGBI, p.310-11, ep.103</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1244?