---
letter_id: "24370"
title: "A letter from Adam Marsh (1242-3?)"
ititle: "a letter from adam marsh (1242-3?)"
ltr_date: "1242-3?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-27"
url: "/letter/663.html"
senders:
  - id: 21199
    name: Adam Marsh
    iname: adam marsh
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most excellent lady, E[leanor], by the grace of God queen of England, lady of Ireland, duchess of Normandy, Aquitaine, countess of Anjou, Brother Adam [sends] peace on earth and glory in heaven.
Behold before the most venerable highness of your serenity, grief makes the wounded heart uneasy and a blush covers the confused face, because despite the compelling efficacy of your command, with obstacles of difficult cases detaining me, I am not able to attend personally the honorable presence of magnificent sublimity this time.  There is however some remedy to my troubles in this, that at the suppliant prayers of my modesty which I put forth humbly in the present letter, what sad devotion can not fullfil, merciful worthiness wishes to pardon.  On the eve of St. Andrew I received the letter of your ladyship with that reverence that was fitting.  On which day I could scarcely prepare the presents swifty for the various interruptions.
I was with the lord count of Cornwall the first Sunday of Advent, whose anger, as I see it, which he expressed strongly in your presence, has abated after consideration.  He added with very firm assertion his benevolence to everything that affects the safety and the honor, as it is most worthy, of both the lord king and his heirs.
May the desirable prosperity of your generosity be preserved always in Christ and the very blessed Virgin.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Excellentissimae dominae A., Dei gratia reginae Angliae, dominae Hiberniae, ducissae Normaniae, Aquitaniae, et comitissae Andegaviae, Frater Ada pacem in terris et gloriam in excelsis.
Ecce coram venerandissima vestrae serenitatis celsitudine et cor saucium dolor anxiat, et obducit rubor confusam faciem, pro eo quod juxta cogentem vestrae jussionis efficaciam honorabilem magnificae sublimitatis praesentiam, obsistentibus difficilium causarum detinentiis, hac vice personaliter adire non sufficio.  Accedit tamen in hac parte ad meorum molestaminum qualecunque remedium, quod ad supplices modicitatis meae obsecrationes, quas per praesentem litteram humiliter repraesento, quod implere non valet tristis devotio, dignatio clemens volet ignoscere.  In vigilia beati Andreae dominationis vestrae litteram cum ea qua decuit reverentia suscepi.  Quo die vix raptim propter varias interruptiones potui conficere praesentia.
Cum domino comite Cornubiae fui Dominica prima Adventus, cujus motus, ut video, quos ipse in audientia vestra severius expressit, suavior mitigavit consideratio.  Astruit autem protestatione firmiori suam benevolentiam circa omnia quae contingunt salutem pariter et honorem, sicut dignissimum est, tam domini regis quam haeredum suorum.
Conservetur, oro, optabilis generositatis vestrae prosperitas in Christo semper et beatissima Virgine.(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Adam apologizes to the queen for not being able to come to her, and relays the news that Richard of Cornwall, her brother-in-law, has overcome his anger.  The anger is not explained, but Eleanor was apparently involved in having Henry's promise to grant Gascony to Richard revoked, and Richard was angry about that.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)  Brewer notes a blank of nine lines and blank reverse.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Adae de Marisco Epistolae</em>, ed. J.S. Brewer (London: Longman et al, 1858), RBMAS, CM, <em>Monumenta Franciscana</em> II, ep.155, p.291</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1242-3?