---
letter_id: "24374"
title: "A letter from Henry III (07/02/1253)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii (07/02/1253)"
ltr_date: "07/02/1253"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/667.html"
senders:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
    url: /people/21381.html
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/76.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The king to all his justiciaries/judges, constables, and all other bailiffs and faithful of England, Wales, and Ireland, greetings.
Since we shall shortly cross to Gascony, we command you by the faith in which you are held to us, enjoining firmly that while we are outside our kingdom of England, you submit and respond to our believed queen Eleanor in all things which pertain to your offices.
And, if before our return from the aforesaid regions of Gascony anything mortal should happen to us, then the castles and all our lands which are in your care and all your other stewardships which you hold from us, you will deliver to our beloved queen Eleanor, to hold in custody for our beloved son Edward, until the legal age of our son.
In which, etc.
King as witness at Suwic, July 2, by the king.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Rex omnibus Justiciariis suis, Vicecomitibus, Constabulariis, & omnibus alliis [sic] Ballivis, & fidelibus suis Angliae, Walliae & Hiberniae salutem.
Quia in proximo transfretaturi sumus in Wasconiam, vobis mandamus in fide, qua nobis tenemini, firmiter injungentes quod, dum extra Regnum nostrum Angliae fuerimus, intendentes sitis & respondentes dilectae Reginae nostrae Alianorae in omnibus, quae ad Ballivas vestras pertinent.
Et, si ante reditum nostrum de partibus praedictis Wasconiae, de nobis humanis contingat, tunc Castra, & omnes terras nostras, in custodia vestra existentes, & omnes alias Ballivas vestras, quas de nobis habetis, liberetis dilectae Reginae nostrae Alianorae, custodiendas per ipsam ad opus dilecti filii nostri Edwardi, usque ad legitimam aetatem ejusdem filiis nostri.
In cujus, &c.
Teste Rege apud Suwic. 2 Julii per Regem.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Henry declares Eleanor his regent while he is in Gascony.  According to the Patent Rolls, 4.209, for July 7, 1253, the letters appointing Eleanor "to keep and govern the realm" were handed to the queen.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer,<em> Foedera,</em> 1.1.174 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>07/02/1253