---
letter_id: "24384"
title: "A letter from Henry III (7/7/1253)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii (7/7/1253)"
ltr_date: "7/7/1253"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/677.html"
senders:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
    url: /people/21381.html
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/76.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The king to archbishops, bishops, abbots, priors, counts, barons, and all his other faithful of England, Wales, and Ireland, greetings.
Know that, when we shall have crossed soon into Gascony, in support of that land of ours, we commit our kingdom of England, and our lands of Wales and Ireland, to our beloved queen, Eleanor, to protect and govern with the counsel of our beloved brother and liege, Richard Count of Cornwall, until our return from said parts.
And therefore we order that you be submissive and accountable to that Queen, as Defender and Governor of said Kingdom, and aforesaid lands, while we are outside of the Kingdom.
In whose, etc.
Witnessed by the King at Portsmouth, 7th day of July.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Rex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, & omnibus aliis fidelibus suis Angliae, Walliae, & Hiberniae salutem.
Sciatis quod, cum in proximo transfretaturi sumus in Wasconiam, in subsidium ejusdem terrae nostrae, nos Regnum nostrum Angliae, & terras nostras Walliae, & Hiberniae, committimus dilectae Reginae nostrae Alianorae, custodiendas & gubernandas cum consilio dilecti fratris & fidelis nostri Ricardi Comitis Cornubiae, usque ad reditum nostrum de partibus praedictis.
Et ideo vobis mandamus quod eidem Reginae, tanquam Custodi & Gubernatrici dicti Regni, & praedictarum terrarum, dum extra idem Regnum fuerimus, intendentes sitis & respondentes.
In cujus, &c.
Teste Rege apud Portesmu. septimo die Julii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>When he left to deal with a rebellion in Gascony, Henry left the government of England in the hands of Eleanor, with the counsel of his brother, Richard of Cornwall.
The summary given in the Calendar of the Patent Rolls, Henry III, 1247-58, 4.214 reads:
"Power to Queen Eleanor and Richard, earl of Cornwall, to remove from office sheriffs and bailiffs who exceed and fall short in their offices, during the king's absence beyond seas, the king's castles remaining in the hands of those to whom they were previously committed.  By K.
They were handed to the queen and the earl."
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.1.174 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>7/7/1253