---
letter_id: "24394"
title: "A letter from Adam Marsh (1253?)"
ititle: "a letter from adam marsh (1253?)"
ltr_date: "1253?"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-27"
url: "/letter/687.html"
senders:
  - id: 21199
    name: Adam Marsh
    iname: adam marsh
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most illustrious lady, E[leanor], by the grace of God queen of England, lady of Ireland, duchess of Normandy, Aquitaine, countess of Anjou, Brother Adam [sends] peace on earth and glory.
How I desire not so much to fulfil prayers of your renowned ladyship as to obey orders, with ready desires of a devoted heart, can not otherwise be introduced except by affections of promises, the exchange of affections may equally answer what can not be done.  In the same way, according to the prudent circumspection of queenly excellence, if the authority of superiors demanded that they leave England, among whom you wished to mark as special friend in Christ lord Walter de Bradley(1), as far as could be done without offending the Divinity, as far as the power of my weakness may suffice, I shall take care to strive to change the purport of the given arrangement.  I know that the most mercificul sollicitude of your serenity tends continually to that to which the request of just necessity compels, or the intention of pious utility leads.
May the highest providence of blessed God concede, I pray, to the lord king, to your piety and to your illustrious children, sublimity of power, profundity of wisdom, breadth of innocence, and longitude of permanence, to the glory of his Name and the safety of your kingdom in Christ Jesus always, etc.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Illustrissimae dominae A., Dei gratia reginae Angliae, dominae Hyberniae, ducissae Normaniae, Aquitaniae, comitissae Andegaviae, Frater Ada pacem in terris et gloriam.
Quum paratis cordis devoti desideriis inclytae dominationis vestrae cupiam in Domino non tam preces perficere quam parere praeceptis, non aliter, reor, insinuari posset, nisi votorum affectibus, affectuum vices ex aequo, quod fieri nequit, correspondere valerent.  Proinde juxta providam reginalis excellentiae circumspectionem, si superiorum auctoritas hoc exegerit, ut Angliam exeant ii de quibus per amicissimum in Christo dominum Walterum de Bradele(1) signare voluistis, quoad fieri poterit inoffensa Divinitate, quantum sufficiet exilitatis meae possibilitas, ad mutandam ordinationis editae sententiam operam dare curabo; sciens quod jugiter illo tendit serenitatis vestrae clementissima sollicitudo quo requisitio compellit justae necessitatis, aut utilitatis piae deducit intentio.
Concedat, oro, altissima Dei benedicti praedestinatio domino regi, vestrae pietati, clarissimis liberis vestris, et sublimitatem potentiae, et profunditatem sapientiae, et latitudinem innocentiae, et longitudinem permanentiae, ad gloriam sui Nominis et regni vestri salutem in Christo Jesu semper, etc.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Eleanor has apparently asked Adam, a Franciscan and one of her advisers, to help her keep Walter de Bradley in England, presumably when the king wanted to take him to Gascony (Howell, 94).  Walter was keeper of the queen's wardrobe from 1249-54 and held a prebend in St. Martin's, London (Howell, 282).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) Walter was keeper of the queen's wardrobe.  A payment is made to him as such, of fifty marks, in 1254, according to Brewer, who also notes that Matthem Paris names him as Queen's Treasurer and reports that he died in 1255.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Adae de Marisco Epistolae,</em> ed. J.S. Brewer (London: Longman et al, 1858), RBMAS, CM, <em><span style="line-height: 1.5; background-color: transparent;">Monumenta Franciscana</span></em><span style="line-height: 1.5; background-color: transparent;">&nbsp;II, ep.152, p.288</span></p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1253?