---
letter_id: "24396"
title: "A letter from Adam Marsh (?)"
ititle: "a letter from adam marsh (?)"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/689.html"
senders:
  - id: 21199
    name: Adam Marsh
    iname: adam marsh
    type: people
    url: /people/21199.html
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/76.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the most excellent lady, E[leanor], by the grace of God queen of England, lady of Ireland, duchess of Normandy and Aquitaine, countess of Anjou, Brother Adam [sends] prosperity of grace in the present and happiness of glory in the future.
The most illustrious serenity of royal eminence should know that any humility of my modesty offers promptness of will in the Lord, as much worthy as owed.  To obeying the goodwill of your highness, already suggested to me a second time by letter of your worthiness, just as benign piety of mercy compels and ministry of desired salvation demands.  In the same way, since propitious Divinity granted the opportunity for things, I shall not delay, as far as is in me, to carry out the order of your ladyship diligently.
May the holy love and chaste fear of the Divine Name be preserved, I pray, in the queen through the Queen of the Angels,(1) to the edification of the church and governing of the kingdom for a very long time.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Excellentissimae dominae A., Dei gratia reginae Angliae, dominae Hyberniae, ducissae Normaniae, Aquitaniae, comitissae Andegaviae, Frater Ada et in praesenti prosperitatem gratiae, et gloriae felicitatem in futuro.
Noverit clarissima reginalis eminentiae serenitas, quod qualiscunque modicitatis meae humilitas non tam dignam quam debitam voluntatis in Domino gerit promptitudinem, ad obtemperandum celsitudinis vestrae beneplacito, mihi jam secundo per dignationis vestrae litteram insinuato, juxta quod hoc ipsum et benigna pietas compellit elementiae, et desideratae salutis requirit ministerium.  Proinde cum propitia Divinitas rebus opportunitatem indulserit, non cunctabor, quantum in me est, vestrae dominationis diligenter implere jussionem.
Conservetur, oro, per Reginam Angelorum, reginae et sanctus amor, et timor castus Divini Nominis, ad ecclesiae aedificationem et gubernationem regni per tempora longissima.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Adam Marsh, a Franciscan and advisor to the queen, assures her he will do what she has twice asked him to do. The letter does not reveal what that is, but Adam does ask a superior to allow brother William Batale to attend the queen, as she had asked, in ep.185, p.332, and in ep.156 (<em>Epistolae</em> 451.html) to her sister, Sanchia, he mentions that William is waiting to have his superiors' orders.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) It is likely that Adam intends a compliment to the queen of the English (Anglorum) in this mention of the Virgin as queen of the angels (Angelorum).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Adae de Marisco Epistolae</em>, ed. J.S. Brewer (London: Longman et al, 1858), RBMAS, CM, <em>Monumenta Franciscana</em> II, ep.154, p.290-91</p>