---
letter_id: "24397"
title: "A letter from Henry III, king of England, her husband (09/08/1253)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii, king of england, her husband (09/08/1253)"
ltr_date: "09/08/1253"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-27"
url: "/letter/690.html"
senders:
  - id: 21385
    name: Henry III, king of England, her husband
    iname: henry iii, king of england, her husband
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>It is charged to the lady queen and to Richard, count of Cornwall, that, since John of Baillol is detained with the king in his service in Gascony and wants his rights in England to be protected, they have assigned without delay that portion of the lands and holdings that were Eleanor's, once countess of Chester, which pertain to that John by hereditary right, not permitting that his absence cause any injury to him in the dividing of those lands and holdings.  Witness as above.  Witness the King.
In camp outside La Réole, 8th day of September, etc.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Mandatum est domine regine et Ricardo, comiti Cornubie, quod, quia Johannes de Baillol moratur cum rege in servicio suo in Vasconia, et propter hoc vult quod jura sua salventur melius in partibus Anglie, porcionem que ipsum Johannem jure hereditario contingerat de terris et tenementis que fuerunt Eleonore, quondam comitisse Cestrie, ei sine dilatione assignari faciant, non permittendo quod in partitione terrarum et tenementorum illorum eidem prejudicetur occasione absencie sue. Teste ut supra. Teste Rege. In castris extra Regulam, VIII die septembris, anno, etc. XXXVII.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king writes to his regent, Eleanor and his brother, Richard, the count of Cornwall, to protect the interests of John of Baillol who is abroad in his service.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Lettres de Rois, Reines et Autres Personnages des Cours de France et D'Angleterre</em>, ed. M. Champollion-Figeac (Paris: Imprimerie Royale, 1839), 1.103-04, ep. 7.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>09/08/1253