---
letter_id: "24403"
title: "A letter from Innocent IV (06/11/1254)"
ititle: "a letter from innocent iv (06/11/1254)"
ltr_date: "06/11/1254"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/696.html"
senders:
  - id: 21421
    name: Innocent IV
    iname: innocent iv
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Innocent, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his dearest daughter in Christ illustrious queen of England, greetings and apostolic blessing.
As to the business which our dearest son in Christ the illustrious king of England is known to have assumed in the person of our son, Edmund illustrious king of Sicily, born to you and him, for it to be carried out forcefully and virilely as befits such a prince, much money is needed.  We have asked and exhorted assiduously imposing strictly that, in remission of his sins, the king of England restrain his hands completely from all expenses, pious (since the pursuit of that business supercedes all works of piety) or otherwise (except what is necessary which can in no way be avoided).  He should know for certain that unless he restrains himself from them, we can in no way believe that he has the spirit to carry out the foresaid business.
We ask, admonish, and exhort your highness assiduously that you restrain yourself from those things and admonish assiduously and persuade said king on our part to that very often with sollicitous exhortations, as seems expedient to you.
Dated Asisi, 11th Kalends of June, 11th year of our pontificate.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Innocentius Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, carissimae in Christo filiae Reginae Angliae illustri, salutem & Apostolicam benedictionem.
Cum ad negotium, quod carissimus in Christo filius noster Rex Angliae illustris, in persona carissimi in Christo filii nostri Edmundi Regis Siciliae illustris, tui & ejus nati, assumpsisse dinoscitur, prosequendum potenter & viriliter, prout decet tantum Principem, multa sit pecunia oportuna,
Eundem Regem Angliae rogandum duximus attentius & hortandum, in remissionem ei peccaminum districtius imponentes, ut ab omnibus expensis, tam piis (cum ipsius negotii prosecutio superet omnia opera pietatis) quam aliis (exceptis dumtaxat necessariis, quae quoquo modo vitari non possunt) cohibeat de caetero penitus manus suas:
Sciturus pro certo quod, nisi ab hiis refraenaverit se, omnino credere non possumus quod habeat animum praedictum negotium prosequendi.
Quocirca celsitudinem tuam rogamus, monemus, & hortamur attente , quatinus & tu ab hiis reipsam cohereas, et praedictum Regem ad id saepe saepius sollicitis exhortationibus, ex parte nostra, quotiens expedire videris, moneas attentius & inducas.
Dat. Asissi, undecimo Kal. Junii, Pontificatus nostri anno undecimo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Innocent writes to the queen for her support in focusing the king's attention and money on supporting his opposition to the Hohenstaufen heir, Conrad, in Sicily.  Henry has committed their son, Edmund, to that struggle in hopes of his becoming king of Sicily, with Eleanor's enthusiastic support.  The English clergy and magnates opposed the project as too oppressive a financial burden.  After the death of Innocent, Alexander IV continued the policy and invested Edmund with the kingship, but he never exercized it.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.1.183</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>06/11/1254