---
letter_id: "24405"
title: "A letter from Alphonse of Poitiers (11/05/1263)"
ititle: "a letter from alphonse of poitiers (11/05/1263)"
ltr_date: "11/05/1263"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/698.html"
senders:
  - id: 21219
    name: Alphonse of Poitiers
    iname: alphonse of poitiers
    type: people
    url: /people/21219.html
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/76.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his excellent and beloved E[leanor], by the grace of God queen of England, Alphonse, son of the king of France, count of Poitiers and Toulouse, greetings and the affection of sincere love.
The troubles inflicted on you do displease us, and we tell you that we have written our will more fully to that most excellent lady M[arguerite], queen of France, concerning the ships and galleys you wrote us about.  We are very grateful to you for wishing to know about our state, and want you to know that when this was written, we were well, God granting it, and we hope to learn the same about you again and again.
Dated Corbeil, Monday after the feast of All Saints.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Excellenti et dilecti sue A., Dei gratia regine Anglie, Alfonsus, filius regis Francie, comes Pictavie et Tholose, salutem et sincere dilectionis affectum. Gravamina vobis illata nobis displicent, vobis significantes quod super navibus et galeis, de quibus nobis scripsistis, excellentissime domine M., regine Francie, nostram scripsimus plenius voluntatem. Super hoc autem quod statum nostrum scire desideratis per vestras litteras, exinde vobis scimus bonum gratum, scientes quod in confectione presencium eramus in bono statu, Domino concedente, quod de vobis scire sepius affectamus. Datum apud Corbolium, die lune post festum Omnium sanctorum.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Alphonse writes in response to Eleanor's letter of October 15, ep.2020 (<em>Epistolae</em> 647.html), asking him for ships, and referring him to her sister the queen of France for details. Marguerite was also pressing Alphonse to help the English royal family. Eleanor has been in Gascony trying to raise armed forces and ships to carry them to the aid of her husband Henry III and their son Edward, during the rebellion led by Simon of Montfort.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Correspondance Administrative d'Alfonse de Poitiers,</em> ed. Auguste Molinier (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1894), <em>Collection de Documents inédits sur l'Histoire de France,</em> 2.544-5, ep.2021</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>11/05/1263