---
letter_id: "24408"
title: "A letter from Henry III (11/18/1264)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii (11/18/1264)"
ltr_date: "11/18/1264"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/701.html"
senders:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The king to the queen of England, greetings and affection of sincere love.
Know that we, and our firstborn, Edward, are healthy and safe, which we sincerely desire to know about you; letting you know that our business and yours and that of our foresaid son, proceeds to the honor of God and ours and yours, blessed be God; so that we have a sure hope of achieving firm and good peace in our kingdom, for which you may be happy and rejoice.
Moreover we understand that in these days certain people propose a sale or alienation of our rights and fiefs and those of our said son in that region, to the disinheriting of us and our heirs, which you ought not to wish nor endure in any way.
Whence we order you that you permit nothing to be attempted nor done in these arrangements; give credence to what Master Edward de la Cnol, deacon of Welles, bearer of the presents, will tell you on our part over these and other things.
King as witness at Windsor, November 18.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Rex Reginae Angliae salutem & sincerae dilectionis affectum.
Sciatis nos, & Eadwardum Primogenitum nostrum, sanos & incolumes esse, quod de vobis scire precordialiter affectamus; vobis significantes quod negotia nostra, & vestra, & praedicti filii nostri, ad honorem Dei ac nostrum, & vestrum procedunt, Benedictus Deus; ita quod certam spem habemus de firma & bona pace habenda in Regno nostro, propter quod hilares sitis & jocundae.
Praeterea intelleximus quod quidam venditionem, seu alienationem jurium & feodalium nostrorum, & praedicti filii nostri, in partibus illis, ad nostram & haeredum nostrorum exhaeredationem, facere proponunt hiis diebus, contra voluntatem nostram; quod nullatenus velle aut sustinere debetis.
Unde vobis mandamus quod super praemissis nichil attemptari, vel fieri permittatis; super hiis & aliis, quae Magister Edwardus de la Cnol Decanus Wellensis, praesentium lator, vobis ex parte nostra dixerit, fidem adhibentes eidem.
Teste Rege apud Windesor. 18 die Novembris.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king tells the queen to prevent sales or alienations of his and his heirs' rights.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera,</em> 1.2.92 (3rd ed.) and an abbreviated translation in <em>Calendar of the Patent Rolls, Henry III</em> 5 (1258-1266), 474</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>11/18/1264