---
letter_id: "24419"
title: "A letter from Honorius III (1224)"
ititle: "a letter from honorius iii (1224)"
ltr_date: "1224"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-17"
url: "/letter/712.html"
senders:
  - id: 21403
    name: Honorius III
    iname: honorius iii
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 77
    name: Blanche of Castile, queen of France
    iname: blanche of castile, queen of france
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Honorius bishop ... to our dearest daughter in Christ, illustrous queen of France, greetings, etc.
The royal eminence knows how the Lord in whose hand are the powers and the rights of all kingdoms, gave the Byzantine empire into the hands of the Gauls by whom it has virtually been principally governed up to now, newly there as if a new France is created.  Nor is it [royal eminence] ignorant, we believe, of how with our dearest son in Christ, the illustrious emperor of Constantinople, cousin of our dearest son in Christ, Louis, illustrious king of the Franks your husband, presiding over that empire, the power of the Gauls has diminished and is now diminishing, their adversaries growing seriously stronger against them, so that unless help is swiftly given to that empire, it is feared that irreparable harm threatens the Latins in their persons and possessions and generally inestimable harm to the people of Gaul, as can be more fully understood than is fitting for us to relate.
Since therefore it would be not only quite impious but also inhuman, if said emperor, called king of all the Latins, and the Gallic people were allowed to perish at the hands of the enemies of God while he can be helped.  We diligently urge that his magnificence be asked and exhorted, enjoining him for the remission of his sins, noting that said empire can scarcely be lost without grave notice of his negligence, which at the time of his father was acquired with great glory of force, that he strive to send suitable and swift help to that emperor, while he can comfortably enough, so that he prove himself zealous of his own honor and that of the Gallic people, indeed of God, and deserve therby to be commended by the worthy praises of God and men.  Therefore we ask, we admonish, and exhort your magnificence assiduously that you solicitously persuade and inspire said king your husband to that.
Dated at the Lateran, 13th kalends of June, in the eighth year.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Honorius episcopus . . ., carissimae in Christo filiae nostrae illustri Reginae Franciae salutem etc.
Novit regia Celsitudo qualiter Dominus, in cujus manu sunt omnium potestates et omnium jura regnorum, in Gallicorum manibus tradidit imperium Romaniae, quod per eosdem est quasi principaliter hactenus gubernatum, ibique noviter quasi nova Francia est creata; nec ignorat, ut credimus, qualiter nunc, carissimo in Christo filio nostro illustri Constantinopolitano Imperatori, consobrino carissimi in Christo filii nostri Ludovici illustris Regis Francorum, viri tui, eidem imperio praesidente, diminuta est et diminuitur potentia Gallicorum, adversariis invalescentibus graviter contra eos, ita quod, nisi eidem Imperatori celeriter succurratur, timetur ne irreparabile Latinis personarum et rerum detrimentum immineat, et generaliter genti Gallicae damnum inextimabile, sicut plenius intelligi potest quam deceat nos referre.
Quia igitur nimis esset non solum impium, sed etiam inhumanum, si dictum Imperatorem et gentem Gallicam ab inimicis Dei, et Latinorum omnium dictus Rex, perire, dum ei potest succurrere, pateretur; magnificentiam suam attentius rogandam duximus et hortandam, in remissionem sibi peccaminum injungentes, ut prudenter advertens quod dictum imperium vix sine gravi negligentiae suae nota posset amitti, quod tempore patris sui cum grandi virtutis gloria exstitit acquisitum, eidem Imperatori, dum adhuc satis commode potest, festinum et opportunum studeat destinare succursum, ita quod gentis Gallicae, immo Dei, et suum zelari probetur honorem, et apud Deum et homines dignis exinde mereatur laudibus commendari.  Quocirca magnificentiam tuam rogamus, monemus et hortamur attentius, quatenus dictum Regem virum tuum ad id sollicite animes et inducas.
Datum Laterani, XIII kal. junii, anno octavo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope exhorts the queen to persuade her husband to give aid to the emperor of Constantinople, whose rule is threatened.  The emperor of Constantinople at this point was Robert of Courtenay, reputed to have been dissolute and corrupt.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>HGF 19.754-55, Horoy, <em>Honorii III, Opera omnia</em>, 4.653, Epistolae, bk.8 ep.227, same text; summary in RHP, 2.250-51 #5006.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1224