---
letter_id: "24423"
title: "A letter from Gregory IX, pope (1231)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory ix, pope (1231)"
ltr_date: "1231"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-17"
url: "/letter/716.html"
senders:
  - id: 21365
    name: Gregory IX, pope
    iname: gregory ix, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21365.html
receivers:
  - id: 77
    name: Blanche of Castile, queen of France
    iname: blanche of castile, queen of france
    type: woman
    url: /woman/77.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Bishop Gregory, servant of the servants of God, to his dearest daughter in Christ, the queen of the French, greetings and apostolic blessing.
The letters which the royal excellence sent us for our beloved son the noble man, count of Toulouse, about the land which the Roman church has in its hands on this side of the Rhône, we received with affection of customary benevolence, and we have diligently studied what is contained in them etc., as related in the following letter.
Dated at Rieti, 4th nones of March, in the 5th year of our pontificate.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Gregorius Episcopus servus servorum Dei, Carissimae in Christo filiae Reginae Francorum illustri Salutem et Apostolicam benedictionem.  Literas quas pro dilecto filio nobili viro Comite Tolosano super terra, quam Romana Ecclesias citra Rodanum ad manus suas retinuit, Regalis nobis excellentia destinavit, solitae benignitatis affectu recepimus, et quae continebantur in eis intelleximus diligenter etc. ut in proxime relata epistola.
Datum Reate IV Nonas Martii, Pontificatus nostri anno quinto.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>According to the pope’s letters to king Louis IX of France and to the count of Toulouse, the pope is hesitant to restore lands east of the Rhone to the count for fear the Cathar heresy recently suppressed at great cost may recur, despite the pleas of the emperor, Frederick, and “the king and queen of France,” Louis and his mother Blanche.  But he has sent legates to study the situation and make recommendations.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Luc d’Achery, <em>Spicilegium sive Collectio Veterum Aliquot Scriptorum</em> (Paris: 1723), 3.605</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1231