---
letter_id: "24425"
title: "A letter from Gregory IX (1233)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory ix (1233)"
ltr_date: "1233"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-02"
url: "/letter/718.html"
senders:
  - id: 21364
    name: Gregory IX
    iname: gregory ix
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 77
    name: Blanche of Castile, queen of France
    iname: blanche of castile, queen of france
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To Blanche, illustrious queen of France.
Desires which look to piety and pertain to the salvation of souls we are bound to help with a certain hand of solicitude and effectively support with diligent zeal within our ability.  Therefore, dearest daughter in Christ, inclined to your honorable requests, which we willingly favor in their faithful and devout purpose, to enter once in your life with ten honorable women into a Cistercian monastery at the time of a general chapter, and to see the convent and the others gathered there, which you assert you desire not a little because of devotion, we grant you free license by the authority of the presents.   To no one, therefore, of our grant, etc.  If anyone, etc.
Dated at the Lateran, 7th kalends of April, in the 7th year.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Blanche, Illustri Reginae Franciae.
Vota, quae pietatem respiciunt, et ad salutem pertinent animarum, quadam manu solicitudinis innuare tenemur, et pro posse nostro diligenti studio efficaciter promovere.  Eapropter, charissima in Christo filia, tuis honestis supplicationibus inclinati, quam libenter fideli, devotoque in proposito confovemus, intrandi cum decem honestis mulieribus, semel in vita tua, tempore Capituli Generalis, Cisterciense Monasterium, et videndi Conventum, et alios congregatos ibidem, quod devotionis causa re non modicum asseris affectare; liberam tibi authoritate presentium concedimus facultatem.  Nulli ergo nostra concessionis, etc.  Si quis autem, etc.
Datam Laterani, septima Kalend. Aprilis, anno VII.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope grants the queen permission to enter a Cisterican monastery and observe the chapter meeting.  Honorius III made the same concession in 1223.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>Manrique, 4.455, RPR #6971
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1233