---
letter_id: "24428"
title: "A letter from Henry III, king of England (1235)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii, king of england (1235)"
ltr_date: "1235"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-03"
url: "/letter/721.html"
senders:
  - id: 21384
    name: Henry III, king of England
    iname: henry iii, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21384.html
receivers:
  - id: 77
    name: Blanche of Castile, queen of France
    iname: blanche of castile, queen of france
    type: woman
    url: /woman/77.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his beloved cousin Blanche, by the grace of God illustrious queen of France, Henry, by that same grace king of England, etc.
We send to the noble man Louis, king of France, your illustrious son, and to you our beloved abbot of Beaulieu and master Henry the chancellor of St. Paul of London, to speak with that king and with you on those things which touch his state and yours and ours, assiduously asking your love to admit them benevolently and to listen to them.
The king as witness at Westminster, 26th of February.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Dilectae consanguineae suae B. Dei gratia, illustri Reginae Franciae, Henricus, eadem gratia Rex Angliae, etc.
Mittimus ad nobilem virum Lodovicum Regem Franciae, illustrem filium vestrum, et ad vos, dilectos nobis Abbatem de Bello-loco, et Magistrum Henricum Cancellarium Sancti Pauli London. ad loquendum cum ipso Rege una vobiscum super hiis, quae tangunt statum suum, et vestrum, et nostrum:  dilectionem vestram attentius rogantes, quatenus ipsos benigne admittere et audire velitis.
Teste Rege apud Westm. 26 die Februarii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Henry announces the messengers he is sending to make peace with Louis, asking the queen to meet with them and hear them out.  After the letter, the text says:  “Other letters are also addressed to the king of France about the same matter.”
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera,</em> 1.337</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1235