---
letter_id: "24429"
title: "A letter from Gregory IX, pope (10/30/1237)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory ix, pope (10/30/1237)"
ltr_date: "10/30/1237"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-21"
url: "/letter/722.html"
senders:
  - id: 21365
    name: Gregory IX, pope
    iname: gregory ix, pope
    type: people
    url: /people/21365.html
receivers:
  - id: 77
    name: Blanche of Castile, queen of France
    iname: blanche of castile, queen of france
    type: woman
    url: /woman/77.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Bishop Gregory, servant of the servants of God, to his dearest daughter in Christ B[lanche], illustrious queen of France, greetings and apostolic blessing.
Having understood some time ago that Vatatzes, enemy of God and of the church, had seriously oppressed the empire of Constantinople and seizing many of its cities and places, had completely laid them waste, expecting that in the preservation of that empire help is known to be offered, especially for the holy land, and that if — let it not be so — it be subjected to the dominion of the Greeks who hate the Latins more than pagans do, the division of the land would easily result, we entreat the royal serenity by apostolic letters to send suitable fighters or other appropriate aid in support of the empire.
Truly, since unless aid is given to that empire soon, the holy land and the empire could suffer the harm of irreparable damage, we assiduously entreat your highness again that you not delay to help that empire, out of reverence for the apostolic see and us.  For we who deem that the holy land is especially helped by aid to the empire, by the mercy of almighty God and his blessed apostles Peter and Paul and by the authority which he granted to us, trusting in [your] aid to the aforesaid empire with suitable fighters or other appropriate help, grant you according to the counsel of our venerable brother [William] bishop of Paris and our beloved son, brother William our confessor, or either of them, that indulgence of sins which you would have if you personally brought it [the help] to the holy land.
Dated at the Lateran, 3rd kalends of November, in the 11th year of our pontificate.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Gregorius episcopus, servus servorum Dei, carissime in Xpisto* filie B[lanche] illustri regine Francie, salutem et apostolicam benedictionem.
Olim intellecto quod Vatacius, Dei et Ecclesie inimicus, graviter imperium Constantinopolitanum oppresserat, et plures ipsius civitates et loca capiens ea funditus devastarat, attendentes, quod in ipsius conservatione Imperii specialiter Terre sancte subsidium noscitur promoveri, et si, quod absit, dominio Grecorum, qui magis Latinos odiunt quam pagani, subicitur, de facili ejusdem terre discidium sequeretur, serenitatem regiam apostolicis exoravimus litteris quod in succursum ejusdem Imperii ydoneos bellatores aut aliud congruum subsidium destinares; verum quia, nisi in brevi eidem succuratur Imperio, Terra sancta ac ipsum Imperium irreparabilis dampni incurrere poterunt detrimentum, celsitudinem tuam sicut iterum sic attentius duximus exorandam quatinus eidem Imperio, ob reverentiam Apostolice Sedis et nostram, succurrere non moreris.  Nos enim, qui in ipsius Imperii subsidio succurri Terre sancte specialiter reputamus, de omnipotentis Dei misericordia et beatorum Petri et Pauli apostolorum ejus ac ea quam idem nobis concessit auctoritate confisi, tibi in succursum prefati Imperii bellatores ydoneos vel aliud congruum subsidium, juxta consilium venerabilis fratris nostri (Willelmi) Parisiensis episcopi et dilecti filii fratris Willelmi penitentiarii nostri, vel ipsorum alterius, transmittenti illam concedimus indulgentiam peccatorum quam habitura esses si in Terra sancta personaliter te transferres.
Datum Laterani, III Kalendas novembris, pontificatus nostri anno undecimo. 
* Christo, using Greek letters chi and rho.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The pope urges the queen to help the empire of Constantinople against the Greeks as quickly as possible, promising her the same indulgence for that aid she would receive if she went as a crusader.  The territory of the Greek empire of Nicaea lay just to the south of the Latin empire, the former commanded by John III Vatatzes (1222-54), the latter under Baldwin II (1237-61).  Vatatzes succeeded in taking land from the Franks early in his reign and Baldwin was not able to regain it.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Teulet, <em>Layettes du Trésor des Chartes</em> (Paris, 1863), 2, #2577</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>10/30/1237