---
letter_id: "24443"
title: "A letter from Louis IX, king of France (1251)"
ititle: "a letter from louis ix, king of france (1251)"
ltr_date: "1251"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/736.html"
senders:
  - id: 21454
    name: Louis IX, king of France
    iname: louis ix, king of france
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 77
    name: Blanche of Castile, queen of France
    iname: blanche of castile, queen of france
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To his most excellent and dearest lady and mother Blanche, by the grace of God illustrious queen of the French, Louis, by that same grace king of the French, greetings and ready with sincere love, pleased to do her will.
Letters of certain barons and knights which we have with us, on the loans made to them, we send to your excellence in the present pouch with other letters of ours so that the letters be given to those who paid money or made the loan, lest if the letters are retained, it might redound to their danger or harm.
Dated in the camps near Caesarea, Monday before the feast of St. Michael.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Excellentissime et karissime domine et matri sue B[lanche], Dei gratia Francorum regine illustri, Ludovicus, eadem gratia Francorum rex, salutem et cum sincera dilectione paratam ad ipsius beneplacita voluntatem.
Litteras quorundam baronum et militum, quas penes nos habebamus, super mutuis sibi factis, excellentie vestre mittimus in presenti scrinio cum aliis litteris nostris, ut illis, qui pecuniam sive mutuum sibi factum persolverint, littere sue reddantur, ne possent eis, si retinerentur, in periculum aut incommodum redundare.
Datum in castris juxta Cesaream, die lune ante festum Beati Michaeli.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Louis sends his mother the records of loans made to some of the barons and knights in his army apparently to protect the claims of those who made the loans, mainly Italian merchants who provided necessities to Louis and his barons.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>Teulet, Layettes, 3.142 #3960
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1251