---
letter_id: "24470"
title: "A letter from Berengaria of Navarre, queen of England (1193)"
ititle: "a letter from berengaria of navarre, queen of england (1193)"
ltr_date: "1193"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-08"
url: "/letter/763.html"
senders:
  - id: 79
    name: Berengaria of Navarre, queen of England
    iname: berengaria of navarre, queen of england
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Charter of B[erengaria], queen of the English, duchess of the Normans and Aquitanians, countess of the Angevins, and Joan foremerly queen and lady of the Sicilians.
Adam son of Adam de Talewrth and master John de Tolosa canon of Hereford have borrowed 150 marcs sterling, at 13 shillings and fourpence sterling to the marc, from Roman citizens whose names are given in charters, in their presence and in that of companions (socii) of their lord the king of England, namely Geoffrey de Vendosm', William de Roches, Rogo de Sac[eio], and Stephen de Tornham', and Guy de Bernez', binding themselves by corporal oath to repay the money at the fair of Troyes and appointing P[eter] bishop of Porto surety to the Roman creditors at the prayer [and] by the witness of both queens.  And for his greater security, they have given John de Suloeitum [Soligneio], Guischard Leidett', Roger de Sancto Germano, Alan son of Alan de Sorham, to the said bishop as sureties who are bound to pay the said money when called on, if the debtors shall not have paid it at the term appointed.  In order that the bishop may suffer no loss for [doing] this, for which he rather deserves their favour and that of their lord the king, they have commanded Walter archbishop of Rouen and the other co-justiciaries (conjusticiariis) of England that if the said debtors or sureties shall not repay the money as agreed, they shall compel them, through their tenements and possessions, and in every way, to repay the money and make good the losses and expenses incurred by the bishop or the creditors in recovering it, and confiscating, if need be, their tenements and possessions, shall pay the actual money out of the treasury (de fisco regio).  They grant these letters, under their seal (nostro sigillo) to the bishop in token, that this is done in their presence and that of the companions of the lord king.
Test[ibus] nobis ipsis apud Lateranum ix.die Aprilis anno primo post reditum nostrum de Sirya.
[With us as witness at the Lateran, 9th day of April in the first year after our return from Syria.]
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>On their way back from Palestine, Berengaria and her sister-in-law Joan, formerly queen of Sicily, stopped in Rome for six months.  There they both witnessed a loan transaction, in which they were involved at least to the extent of requesting the bishop of Porto to stand surety for it.  The Calendar published only the translation.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>J.H. Round, ed., <em>Calendar of Documents preserved in France Illustrative of the History of Great Britain and Ireland</em> (London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1899, repr. Kraus, 1967), 1.94-95.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1193