---
letter_id: "24474"
title: "A letter from John, king of England (8/2/1201)"
ititle: "a letter from john, king of england (8/2/1201)"
ltr_date: "8/2/1201"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-20"
url: "/letter/767.html"
senders:
  - id: 21441
    name: John, king of England
    iname: john, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21441.html
receivers:
  - id: 79
    name: Berengaria of Navarre, queen of England
    iname: berengaria of navarre, queen of england
    type: woman
    url: /woman/79.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>John, by the grace of God, etc., to the justiciary and barons of the exchequer of london, etc.
Know that it has been agreed between us and Berengaria, once queen of England, wife of king Richard our brother, about her dower, which she asked for; namely that we have assigned her, for her dower, a thousand marks of silver per year; 13 shilling and 4 pence computed for the mark.
And of those thousand marks she will receive 150 Angevin pounds from the income of Segreio which we assigned to her; and of the rest, beyond those 150 pounds, she will receive half at our exchequer at Caen on the feast of St. Michael, within eight days after the feast, the other half at Easter, within eight days after Easter.
And thus we order you to make that remaining payment of said half at said time, without delay or interference to her or her representative who carries these letters to you.
As witness, W. Count Marshall, at Chinon, 2nd day of August.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Johannes, Dei gratia, etc. justiciario Angliae et baronibus de scaccario London, etc.  Sciatis ita convenisse inter nos et Berengariam quondam Reginam Angliae, uxorem Regis Ricardi fratris nostri, de dote sua quam petebat; scilicet quod nos assignavimus ei, pro dote sua, mille marcas argenti annuatim; xiii solidis & iv denariis computatis pro marca.
Et de illis millibus marcis, recipiet ipsa centum et quinquaginta libra Andegavenses de redditibus Segreii quas ei assignavimus; et de residuo, ultra illas centum et quinquaginta libras, recipiet medietatem ad scaccarium nostrum apud Cadomum in festo sancti Michaelis, ita quod pacabitur infro octo dies post festum sancti Michaelis; alteram medietatem ad Pascham, ad scaccarium nostrum, ita quod pacabitur infra viii dies post clausum Paschae.
Et ideo vobis mandamus quod ei, vel certo nuncio suo, has litteras vobis deferenti, medietatem praedicti residui, ad praedictum terminum, sine dilatione et occasione, habere faciatis.
Teste W. comite Marescall, apud Chinon ii/do die Augusti.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>This is the dower settlement John announced between himself and the widow of his brother, king Richard, which was not paid and was fought over for decades.  Though it is addressed to his barons, it is clear from the directions that she held a copy of it.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Foedera, Conventiones, Litterae et Acta Publica</em>, ed. T. Rymer, AD 1201, 1.1.40</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>8/2/1201