---
letter_id: "24475"
title: "A letter from John, king of England (1206)"
ititle: "a letter from john, king of england (1206)"
ltr_date: "1206"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-08"
url: "/letter/768.html"
senders:
  - id: 21441
    name: John, king of England
    iname: john, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21441.html
receivers:
  - id: 79
    name: Berengaria of Navarre, queen of England
    iname: berengaria of navarre, queen of england
    type: woman
    url: /woman/79.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The king to all, etc.
Know that we have received in our safe conduct our dearest sister, the lady queen Berengaria, and her people, for coming to us in England and going away; provided they give assurance that no harm will come to our kingdom through them when they are in England.
We order you, nonetheless, to do no harm to her or hers, or permit that impediment, injury or trouble be given them.
And these letters are valid until the feast of St. Peter in Chains, in the 8th year, etc.
Myself as witness at Oteford, 27th day of March, in the 7th year, etc.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Rex omnibus, etc.
Sciatis quod recepimus in salvum conductum nostrum karissimam sororem nostram, dominam Reginam Berengariam, et suos, in veniendo ad nos in Angliam, et in redeundo; ita quod, cum applicuerint in Angliam, secuitatem praestent quod nullum, per eos, malum eveniet regno nostro.
Veruntamen vobis mandamus, praecipientes quod ei, vel suis, nullum super hoc faciatis, vel fieri permittatis impedimentum, injuriam vel gravamen.
Et valeant litterae istae usque ad festum sancti Petri ad Vincula, anno, etc. octavo.
Teste meipso, apud Oteford' vicesimo septimo die Martii, anno, etc. septimo.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king grants his sister-in-law and her people a safe-conduct for travel in England.  Berengaria herself never went to England.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.140 (94).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1206