---
letter_id: "24477"
title: "A letter from John, king of England (1216)"
ititle: "a letter from john, king of england (1216)"
ltr_date: "1216"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-08"
url: "/letter/770.html"
senders:
  - id: 21441
    name: John, king of England
    iname: john, king of england
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 79
    name: Berengaria of Navarre, queen of England
    iname: berengaria of navarre, queen of england
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The king to his beloved sister Berengaria, once queen of England, greetings and affection of sincere love.
Since at the instigation of the enemy of mankind, and the connivance of our barons whom he incited against us, our kingdom of England is already troubled, and now moreso from the advent of Louis, the firstborn of the king of France, who not fearing to offend God or the Church, endeavors to take our kingdom from us, we have already poured out the largest part of the money which we had determined to spend in seizing the Holy Land from the hands of the enemies of the cross and each day we must spend more and more.
We beg your love, in which we have confidence, most assiduously, asking that you have compassion on us in this time of such adversity, and patiently bear for the present [a delay] of the payment of money by which we are bound to you.  Until with the mediation of him who disposes the soul as he wishes, this dark cloud is cleared from us and our kingdom rejoices with full tranquillity.  And we will then answer you fully for the money we owe you with the greatest thanks.
In witness, etc., at Devize, 8th day of June.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Rex dilectae sorori suae Berengariae, quondam Reginae Angliae, salutem, et sincerae dilectionis affectum.
Cum instigante humani generis inimico, et procurantibus baronibus nostris, quos idem erga nos concitavit, regnum nostrum Angliae jamdudum turbatum fuerit, et nunc magis ex adventu Lodowici primogeniti Regis Franciae (qui, nec Deum metuens offendere nec ecclesiam, regnum nostrum nobis auferre molitur) maximam partem pecuniae, quam ad terram sanctam de manibus inimicorum crucis eripiendam, expendere decrevimus, jam effuderimus [sic], et singulis diebus magis ac magis effundere nos oporteat.
Dilectionem vestram de qui fedem gerimus, attentius duximus exorandam, rogantes quatinus, in hujusmodi adversitatis tempore nobis compatientes, de solutione pecuniae, qui vobis tenemur, ad praesens patienter sustinere volitis; donec, eo mediante, qui animam, prout vult, disponit, nubes obscura nobiscum serenetur, et regnum nostrum plena tranquillitate laetetur:  nosque de pecunia nobis vobis debita, cum summa gratiarum actione, ad plenum vobis respondebimus.
Teste, etc., apud Divisas, viii die Junii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Berengaria, widowed in 1199, worked hard and long to recover her marriage dower, and reached an agreement with her brother-in-law, king John in 1215, but John never paid what he owed her.  In this letter, John, who has had serious conflicts with his barons and faced an invasion by the son of the king of France, the future Louis VIII, asks to defer the payment he owes.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.213 (141)</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1216