---
letter_id: "24485"
title: "A letter from Henry III, king of England (1219)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii, king of england (1219)"
ltr_date: "1219"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-08"
url: "/letter/778.html"
senders:
  - id: 21384
    name: Henry III, king of England
    iname: henry iii, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21384.html
receivers:
  - id: 79
    name: Berengaria of Navarre, queen of England
    iname: berengaria of navarre, queen of england
    type: woman
    url: /woman/79.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>It is commanded to G. de Nevill, seneschal of Poitou and Gascony that he make sure by his power that the lady queen Berengaria and all those she might have brought with her, have a safe and secure conduct to cross through Poitou and Gascony towards Spain if they wish to, both going and coming.  That by his whole power he have safely conducted messengers and men of that queen going to the king of Navarre, her brother, and those coming from that king to her, bringing letters.
Witnessed by the count, at the Tower of London, 13th day of March.  By lord P[eter], bishop of Winchester.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Mandatum est G. de Nevill, senescallo Pictavie et Wasconie, quod salvum et securum conductum habere faciat domine regine Berengarie, et omnibus quos secum duxerit, ad transitum faciendum si voluerit per partes Pictavie et Wasconie versus Hyspanniam, et in eundo, et redeundo per potestatem suam.  Nuncios autem et homines ipsius regine euntes de ipsa versus regem Navarre, fratrem suum, et de ipso rege versus eam venientes et litteras ipsius deferentes per totam potestatem suam salvo conduci faciat.  Teste comite, apud Turrim Londonie, xiii die Marcii.  Per dominum P. Wintoniensem episcopum.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king orders a safe conduct for the former queen and her company, and for those carrying letters between her and her brother, the king of Navarre.  Though the letter is not addressed to her, it would have been sent to her.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>The Patent Rolls of Henry III,</em> 1.189</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1219