---
letter_id: "24486"
title: "A letter from Henry III, king of England (2/10/1220)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii, king of england (2/10/1220)"
ltr_date: "2/10/1220"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-08"
url: "/letter/779.html"
senders:
  - id: 21384
    name: Henry III, king of England
    iname: henry iii, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21384.html
receivers:
  - id: 79
    name: Berengaria of Navarre, queen of England
    iname: berengaria of navarre, queen of england
    type: woman
    url: /woman/79.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The king to his seneschal of Poitou and Gascony, greetings.  We order you and strictly command that you have conducted safely by all your power the messengers and men of our beloved B[erengaria] former queen of England, those going from her to Spain and those coming to her from Spain carrying letters of hers or with her name.  Do not permit them to be harmed by anyone in anything.  But the injury which the lord of Blay did to her by capturing and despoiling her men, have corrected fully and honorably.
Witnessed by H[enry] etc., at Westminster, 10th day of February.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Rex senescallo suo Pictavie et Wasconie, salutem.  Mandamus vobis et districte precipimus quatinus nuncios et homines dilecte nobis B. quondam regine Anglie, euntes ab ipsa in Hyspaniam et de Hyspania ad ipsam venientes, litteras ipsius deferentes vel nomen suum continentes, per totam potestatem vestram salvo conduci faciatis.  Non permittatis eos ab aliquibus in aliquo molestari.  Injuriam autem quam sibi fecit dominus Blavie homines suos capiendo et spoliando faciatis sibi plenarie et honorifice emendari.  Teste H. etc. apud Westmonasterium, x die Februarii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king orders a safe conduct for Berengaria's messengers and men, and protection from harm for her, as well as full restoration of what has been taken from her.  Though the letter is not addressed to her, it would have been sent to her.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>The Patent Rolls of Henry III</em>, 1.228</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>2/10/1220