---
letter_id: "24525"
title: "A letter from Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes (1186)"
ititle: "a letter from marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes (1186)"
ltr_date: "1186"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-14"
url: "/letter/818.html"
senders:
  - id: 25
    name: Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes
    iname: marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I Marie, countess of Troyes, and Henry, my son, make known to the present and future that since our lord of pious memory, count Henry, assigned to two priests custodians of the treasury of St. Stephen of Troyes for the keeping of the treasury 6 modios (= c. 48 gallons) of wine in the cellar of Troyes to be paid annually and 100 shillings and 60 sesters of oats at Villeros in annual rents, we have praised and confirmed that these revenues are to be continued to our cleric Odo and Odo his brother-in-law, custodians of said treasury and their successor custodians of that treasury.
I Henry have also granted that when I have a seal I shall confirm it by charter to them and by my seal.
Witnesses:  Louis of Arsella, Macharia of Cathalauno, Ferric of Vienne, Gilo of Tornello, Artaud chamberlain, Milo of Provins.
Enacted in the year of the incarnation of the Word 1186.  Dated at Troyes by the hand of Haicius chancellor, noted by William.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego, Maria, Trecen. comitissa, et Henricus filius meus notum facimus praesentibus et futuris, quod, cum pie recordationis dominus noster Henricus comes duobus presbiteris custodibus thesauri beati Stephani Trecensis pro custodia ipsius thesauri VI modios vini in cellario Trecensi annuatim reddendos et C solidos et LX sextarios avene apud Villeros in annuis redditibus assignaverit, nos redditus istos Odoni clerico nostro et Odoni cognato ipsius dicti thesauri custodibus eorumque successoribus custodibus ejusdem thesauri laudavimus et tenendos confirmavimus.  Concessi etiam ego Henricus, quod, quando sigillum habebo, id ipsum eis carta et sigillo meo confirmabo.
Testibus:  Ludovico de Arsella, Macharia de Cathalauno, Ferrico de Vienna, Gilone de Torneello, Artaldo camerario, et Milone de Pruvino.
Actum anno incarnati Verbi MCLXXXVI.  Data Trecis per manum Haicii cancellarii, nota Willelmi.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Marie and her son Henry confirm a gift made by her deceased husband.  Evergates suggests that 1186 was a transitional year in which Marie associated her son in power.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Histoire des Ducs et des Comtes de Champagne, depuis le VIe s. jusqu'a la fin du XIe</em>, H. D'Arbois de Jubainville (Paris: Aug. Aubry, 1861, v.3), document 153, p.472.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1186