---
letter_id: "24527"
title: "A letter from Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes (1194)"
ititle: "a letter from marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes (1194)"
ltr_date: "1194"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-14"
url: "/letter/820.html"
senders:
  - id: 25
    name: Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes
    iname: marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I, Marie, countess of Troyes, make known to present and future, that in my presence it was recognized and granted that Guiter, abbot of St. Loup of Troyes, with the assent of his chapter, granted the home that had been Regina's, daughter of Walter, granatarius, and her children's, to Guido of Dampierre to hold without rent and in peace, as long as he shall live and remain in secular dress;  and after the death of that Guido, the house will revert to the church of St. Loup.  That Guido, not ungrateful for the conferred benefice, has granted for the remedy of his soul whatever he shall build in said possession to said church as alms to be possessed perpetually after his death without claim by anyone, without any challenge.  The canons of that church will celebrate his anniversary each year in recompense for his alms.
If however anyone should presume to trouble or to annoy said church over this alms, I shall guarantee it as long as I hold the land of my dearest son count Henry.
Which I have confirmed by my seal, so that it be held valid.  Enacted in the year of the incarnation of the Word 1194.  Dated by the hand of Walter, chancellor.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Maria, Trecensis comitissa, notum facio presentibus et futuris, in presentia mea fuisse recognitum et concessum, quod Guiterus, abbas Sancti Lupi Trecensis, de assensu capituli sui, domum, que fuit Regine, filie Galteri, granetarii, et puerorum ipsius Regine, et terram ad eandem domum pertinentem, Guidoni de Dampetra tenendam sine censu et quiete concessit, quandiu ipse vixerit, et in habitu permanserit seculari; et, post ejusdem Guidonis decessum, domus illa ad ecclesiam Sancti Lupi revertetur.  Ipse autem Guido, collati non ingratus beneficii, pro remedio anime sue, quidquid in predicta possessione superedificaverit, predicte ecclesie contulit in elemosinam, et post decessum suum sine alicujus reclamatione, sine omni calumpnia concessit perpetuo possidendum.  Canonici vero illius ecclesie anniversarium ejus in hujus recompensationem elemosine singulis annis celebrabunt.
Si autem super hac elemosina dictam ecclesiam vexare vel molestare aliquis presumeret, ego eandem ipsi garentirem elemosinam, quandiu terram karissimi filii mei comitis Henrici tenerem.
Quod ut ratum teneatur, sigillo meo confirmavi.  Actum anno incarnati Verbi Mo nonagesimo quarto.  Data per manum Galterii cancellarii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess confirms and guarantees the gift of a house and its land belonging to the church of St. Loup to Guido II, son of her former constable, for his lifetime, as long as he remains a layman;  at his death it is to revert to the church.  Evergates suggests Ijn a private communication) that Guy had been "leasing urban properties in the 1190's with intent to develop them."   He also notes that "all the regional monasteries and convents have serious exposure to the fairs, with properties and rents right at the center of the fairs."
The source gives 1094 as the date, presumably an error, a C omitted after the M in the Roman numerals.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Histoire des Ducs et des Comtes de Champagne, depuis le VIe s. jusqu'a la fin du XIe</em>, H. D'Arbois de Jubainville (Paris: Aug. Aubry, 1861, v.3), document 162, p.478.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1194