---
letter_id: "24528"
title: "A letter from Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes (1194, July)"
ititle: "a letter from marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes (1194, july)"
ltr_date: "1194, July"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-14"
url: "/letter/821.html"
senders:
  - id: 25
    name: Marie of France, countess of Champagne and Troyes
    iname: marie of france, countess of champagne and troyes
    type: woman
    url: /woman/25.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I Marie, countess of Troyes, make known to present and future that, since my dearest son count Henry conferred a certain part of the vineyard which belonged to Gerard, brother of Milo of Bray, with the assent of that Gerard on the church of Saint-Jean-en-Chastel, situated at the head of that church, having a width of 80 feet and a length from the end of the city wall to the road which leads from St. Quentin to the city.  The venerable man, Thibaut, abbot of the Montiéramey (Arremarensis) monastery soon after bought that part of the vineyard converted to flat land and another small piece of land, from the private chambers up to the hardening Seine, from the children of said Gerard, namely Garner, Hugo, Milo, Emelina, their mother praising and granting, and gave 21 pounds from the benefice of the church of St. John to those children.  Said children praised this sale and praised it again when they came to the age of discretion, and will have their heirs do the same, and they appointed as pledges Gaufrid of Maissiac, Garner of Maissiac, and Salo of Corgens, and Garner of Villa Meruel.
Which, ordered in my presence, that it may be held valid and remain known, I have confirmed with the testimony of my seal, annotated with letters.
Enacted in the year of the incarnation of the Word 1194, in the month of July.
Dated by the hand of Walter, chancellor.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Maria, Trecensium comitissa, notum facio presentibus et futuris, quod, cum karissimus filius meus comes Henricus partem quamdam vineae, que Girardi fratris Milonis de Braio fuerat, de assensu ipsius Girardi ecclesie Sancti Johannis in Castello contulisset, sitam ad caput ejusdem ecclesie, habentem in latitudine octoginta pedes, in longitudine vero a termino muri civitatis usque ad viam que de Sancto Quintino ducit in civitatem:  vir venerabilis Theobaldus, Monasterii Arremarensis abbas, partem illam vinee in planam terram redactam et aliam partiunculam terre, a cameris privatis usque ad Secanam durantem, a pueris predicti Girardi, scilicet Garneo, Hugone, Milone, Emelius, laudante et concedente matre ipsorum, postmodum comparavit, et XXI libras de beneficio ecclesie Sancti Johannis eisdem pueris inde donavit.  Vendagium autem istud dicti pueri laudaverunt, et iterum laudabunt quando ad annos discretionis pervenerint, et id ipsum ab universis heredibus suis laudari facient, et inde constituerunt plegios Gaufridum de Maissiaco, Garnerum de Maissiaco, et Salonem de Corgeseniis, et Garnerum de Villa Meruel.
Quod, in presentia mea ordinatum, ut ratum teneatur et notum permaneat, litteris annotatum sigilli mei testimonio confirmavi.
Actum anno Verbi incarnati Mo Co nonagesimo quarto, mense julio.  Data per manum Galterii cancellarii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The countess confirms the gift of a piece of land on a church, made by her son with the consent of the owner, whose family received payment from the abbot of the monastery.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Histoire des Ducs et des Comtes de Champagne, depuis le VIe s. jusqu'a la fin du XIe</em>, H. D'Arbois de Jubainville (Paris: Aug. Aubry, 1861, v.3), document 163, p.478-79.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1194, July