---
letter_id: "24555"
title: "A letter from Constance of Hungary (1222)"
ititle: "a letter from constance of hungary (1222)"
ltr_date: "1222"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-18"
url: "/letter/849.html"
senders:
  - id: 85
    name: Constance of Hungary
    iname: constance of hungary
    type: woman
    url: /woman/85.html
  - id: 21237
    name: Premysl Otakar I
    iname: premysl otakar i
    type: people
    url: /people/21237.html
receivers:
  - id: 21480
    name: monastery of Rajhrad
    iname: monastery of rajhrad
    type: people
    url: /people/21480.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the holy and individual trinity.  Otakar (and) Premysl, by the grace of god king of the Bohemians, and queen Constance.
So that those things, which have been piously and prudently disposed by us, not be changed by men in the course of time, but remain stable and strong perpetually, we make known to all in the present and the future, that that toll [theloneum] which was first paid in Brodskih of old, of which toll the convent of Rajhrad received a seventeenth, we transferred said toll for our greater ease/benefit to  Kunovice; establishing this to be observed by all inviolably and perpetually, that the said convent of Rajhrad should receive the seventeenth part of that toll through its proctor in Kunovice without any contradiction, nor should anyone dare to increase that toll.
Moreover we confirm to that convent of Rajhrad the tenth cask of the vineyard commonly called Mirozlav, which our brother of good memory, Vladizlaus, gave them; establishing that that tenth of said vineyard be paid fully and wholly to said convent.
In perpetual memory and inviolable confirmation of this our donation and confirmation, we have had the present page written and fortified by the protection of our seals, with the added witness of our court of honest and upright men, whose names follow:  Robert, bishop of Olomuc, Bawar,  chamberlain of Olomuc, Ratibor, judge of Brno, Leo, chamberlain of Brno, Stephen of Medlov, Ditric townsman of Brno, Sdizlaus provost of Brno, Conrad scribe of Brno, and many others.
Enacted at Brno, in the year of the lord’s incarnation, 1222, 10th indiction.
Given by the hand of Hermann, notary of the king.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine sancte et individue trinitatis.  Otacarus, qui et Premizl, dei gracia Boemorum rex, et Constancia regina.
Ne ea, que a nobis pie sunt disposita et prudenter, processu temporis per quemquam possint hominum immutari, set perpetuo stabilia permaneant atque firma, notum facimus universis tam presentibus quam futuris, quod theloneum illud, quod prius in Brodskih ab antiquo solvebatur, cuius thelonei conventus de Raghrad recipiebat decimam septimam, propter nostrum maius commodum idem theloneum in Cunouic transtulimus; statuentes et ab omnibus facientes hoc perpetuo inviolabiliter observari ut prefatus conventus de Raghrad per suum procuratorem in Cunouic absque omni contradictione semper eiusdem thelonei recipiat decimam septimanam nec in eodem theloneo ipsum quisquam audeat aggravare.   Insuper confirmamus eidem conventui de Raghrad decimam tinam de vinea, quam eis dedit frater noster bone memorie Wladizlaus, que vinea in Mirozlav vulgariter appellatur; statuentes ut eadem decima de supradicta vinea suprascripto conventui expleatur integre atque plene.  Ad huius itaque nostre donacionis et confirmacionis perpetuam memoriam et inviolabile firmamentum presentem paginam conscribi fecimus et sigillorum nostrorum munimine roborari, adhibito testimonio nostre curie honestorum hominum et proborum, quorum nomina subsequuntur:  Robertus episcopus Olomucensis, Bawarus camerarius Olomucensis, Ratiborius iudex Brunnensis, leo camerarius Brunnensis, Stephanus de Medlov, Ditricus villicus Burnensis, Sizlaus prepositus Brunnensis, Cunradus scriba Brunnensis et alii quam plures.
Actum in Brunna, anno incarnacionis dominice millesimo CCXXII, indictione X.
Datum per manum Hermanni, regis notarii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king and queen confirm a toll historically paid to the monastery as well as a tenth from a vineyard.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Codex Diplomaticus et Epistolarius Regni Bohemiae</em>, ed. Gustavus Friederich (Prague: 1912), 2.228-29, ep.238.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1222