---
letter_id: "24565"
title: "A letter from Cunegund of Swabia, Queen of Bohemia (1247)"
ititle: "a letter from cunegund of swabia, queen of bohemia (1247)"
ltr_date: "1247"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-18"
url: "/letter/859.html"
senders:
  - id: 86
    name: Cunegund of Swabia, Queen of Bohemia
    iname: cunegund of swabia, queen of bohemia
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We, Cunegund, queen of the Bohemians by the grace of God, make known to all who see the present writing that over the controversy which occurred between the master and brothers of St. Mary at the foot of the bridge of the Prague hospital of St. John the Baptist on the one hand and the master and brothers of the hospital of St. Francis on the street of the Teutonics of Prague on the other over the town of Vysehnevice, which the former wife of Muttine, Bohuslava of good memory had conferred on the house of St. Mary at the foot of the bridge, an amicable settlement was mediated, namely that said master and brothers of St. Mary should collect, without any distress or disturbance, from the proceeds pertaining to the mentioned master and brothers of the hospital of St. Francis of the Holy Cross in Wirben, eighty marks in Prague weight, and they, the master and brothers of St. Mary, renounced before us by every action or right whatever was appropriate to them from the expenses thence incurred against the master and brothers of St. Francis over the mentioned goods.  Therefore with both sides summoned we have given the present letters in witness of that settlement approved by those having and requiring our consent and favor for it, fortified by the force of our seal.
Enacted in this year of the lord’s incarnation 1247, dated by the hand of our notary Frederick, schoolman of Vysehrad.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Nos Chunegundis, dei gracia Boemorum regina, notum facimus universis presens scriptum inspicientibus, quod cum super controversia, que vertebatur inter magistrum et fratres sancte Marie ad pedem pontis Prage hospitalis sancti Johannis Babtiste ex una parte et magistrum ac fratres hospitalis sancti Francisci de vico Theutonicorum Prage ex altera super villa Wissehnewice, quam bone memorie quondam uxor Muttine Bohuzlaua contulerat domui sancte Marie ad pedem pontis, amicabilis composicio intervenisset, videlicet quod dicti magister et fratres sancte Marie de proventibus sancte Crucis in Wirben ad magistrum et fratres hospitalis sancti Francisci memoratos pertinentibus sine omni inquietacione sive perturbacione colligere debeant marcas octoginta ad pondus Pragense, et ipsi, magister et fratres sancte Marie, renunciaverunt coram nobis omni actioni sive iuri, quodcumque competebat eis et expensis proinde factis contra magistrum et fratres sancti Francisci super bonis memoratis:  partibus igitur utrisque convocatis, eandem composicionem ratam habentibus ac requirentibus nostrum consensum super eodem et favorem, presentes dedimus litteras in testimonium sigilli nostri munimine roboratas.
Acta sunt hec anno dominice incarnationis MCCXLVII, datum per manus notarii nostri Friderici, scolastici Wissegradensis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The queen gives her consent to the settlement mediated between the master and brothers of two religious institutions.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Codex Diplomaticus et Epistolarius Regni Bohemiae</em>, ed. Gustavus Friederich, Jindrich Sebanek and Sasa Duskove (Prague: 1962), 4.219-21, ep.125.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1247