---
letter_id: "24567"
title: "A letter from Cunegund of Swabia, Queen of Bohemia (1248, before September 13)"
ititle: "a letter from cunegund of swabia, queen of bohemia (1248, before september 13)"
ltr_date: "1248, before September 13"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-04"
url: "/letter/861.html"
senders:
  - id: 86
    name: Cunegund of Swabia, Queen of Bohemia
    iname: cunegund of swabia, queen of bohemia
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21604
    name: tollgatherers in Bohemia
    iname: tollgatherers in bohemia
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2><p>C[unegund] by the grace of god queen of Bohemia, to all tollgatherers in the kingdom of Bohemia to whom the present letter will come, her grace/favor. Under the patronage/protection of the grace of our lord king and ours we command all tollgatherers, lords as well as servants, whether on roads or on waters, that no one dare to demand a toll from the brothers of the hospital of St. Francis wearing the cross with a star, but let their passage be free and knowing [this] let them grant that our lord king and we, holding said brothers under our protection, wish them to be fully free and immune from every charge or toll through all parts of our kingdom.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>C., dei gratia Boemie regina, universis thelo[ne]ar[ii]s in regno Boemie, ad quos presens littera pervenerit, gratiam suam.  S[ub] [ob]tentu gratie domini nostri regis et nostre precipimus universis tam dominis qu[a]m servis thelonea
te[ne]ntibus tum in viis tum in aquis, quod nullus theloneum a fratribus hospitalis sancti Francisci crucem cum stella portantibus audeat exigere, sed liberum eis transitum faciant et concedant scientes, quod dominus noster rex et nos predictos fratres sub nostra protectione tenentes per omnes partes regni nostri ab omni prorsus exactione seu theloneo liberos esse volumus et immunes.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The queen commands the tollgatherers of Bohemia not to dare to require payment from the brothers of the hospital of St. Francis who wear a cross with a star.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Codex Diplomaticus et Epistolarius Regni Bohemiae</em>, ed. Gustavus Friederich, Jindrich Sebanek and Sasa Duskove (Prague: 1962), 4.239-40, ep.142.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1248, before September 13