---
letter_id: "24570"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Aquitaine (1199)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of aquitaine (1199)"
ltr_date: "1199"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-05"
url: "/letter/865.html"
senders:
  - id: 24
    name: Eleanor of Aquitaine
    iname: eleanor of aquitaine
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Eleanor, by the grace of God, humble queen of England, duchess of Normandy and Aquitaine, and countess of Anjou, to the archbishops, bishops, counts, vicounts, barons, seneschals, provosts, justices, bailiffs and all in the future as well as the present, to whom these letters come, greetings.
Know that we have granted and confirmed in perpetuity by this our present charter to all our beloved and sworn faithful of the commune of Oleron and their heirs perpetual stability and inviolable duration of their commune sworn at Oleron, that they might better defend our and their laws and keep them whole; save retaining in all things fidelity to us and our heirs; save that freedom and those laws of the holy Church, which we have ordered to be observed perfectly and wholly.
We wish therefore and order that they and their heirs keep, defend, and hold the just and free customs of their land, as their ancestors held them under the dominion of our ancestors; and that they have all power and capability of their commune of defending and holding them, save that they exercise and apply fidelity to us and our heirs against all men, if necessary.
That this our grant or confirmation should have perpetual authority and full force, we have had this charter sealed with our seal.
Dated at Les Andelys, in the year of the incarnation of the Word, 1199.
Witnessed by,
Lord Henry then bishop of Saintes.
Peter Bertin then seneschal of Poitiers.
Launo Ogerio,
Chalon de Rochefort,
Geoffrey de Chauvigny,
Humbert of Fouras,
William Bormant,
John Roilloy,
John Vitale,
John Joscelin,
and many others.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Alienora, Dei gratia, humilis Regina Angliae, Ducissa Normaniae & Aquitaniae, & Comitissa Andegaviae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Vicecomitibus, Baronibus, Senescallis, Praepositis, Justiciariis, Ballivis & Universis, tam futuris, quam praesentibus, ad quos Litterae istae pervenerint, salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse, & praesenti Carta nostra in perpetuum confirmasse dilectis & fidelibus nostris universis Juratis communiae Oleronis, & eorum Haeredibus perpetuam stabilitatem & inviolatam firmitatem communiae suae juratae apud Oleronem, ut tam nostra, quam sua propria jura melius defendere possint, & magis integre custodire; salva in omnibus & retenta fidelitate nostra & Haeredum nostrorum; salvo jure nostro & Haeredum nostrorum; salva etiam libertate, & salvis juribus Sanctae Ecclesiae, quae perfecte & integre praecipimus observari.
Volumus igitur & praecipimus ut ipsi, & eorum Haeredes justas & liberas consuetudines terrae suae custodiant, defendant & teneant, sicut Antecessores eorum eas, sub Antecessorum nostrorum Dominio, tenuerunt; & ut, ad ipsas custodiendas, defendendas & tenendas, totam vim & totum posse communiae suae salva fidelitate nostra & Haeredum nostrorum, contra omnem Hominem, si necesse fuerit, exerceant & apponant.
Ut autem haec nostra concessio, sive confirmatio perpetuam autoritatem & plenum robur obtineat, nos Cartam istam sigillo nostro fecimus sigillari.
Dat. apud Andilliacum, Anno Incarnati Verbi Millesimo Centesimo Nonagesimo Nono.
Testibus,
Domino Henrico tunc Xanton. Episcopo.
Petro Bertino tunc Senescallo Pictaviae.
Launo Ogerio,
Chalone de Roch. Forti,
Gauf. de Chauvigne,
Himberti de For.
Willielmo Bormant,
Johanne Roilloy,
Johanne Vitale,
Johanne Joscelino,
Et multis aliis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The queen confirms the liberties and ancient customs that prevailed under the rule of her ancestors to the community of Oleron.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.35 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1199