---
letter_id: "24571"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Aquitaine (1199)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of aquitaine (1199)"
ltr_date: "1199"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-05"
url: "/letter/866.html"
senders:
  - id: 24
    name: Eleanor of Aquitaine
    iname: eleanor of aquitaine
    type: woman
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Eleanor, by the grace of God, humble queen of England, duchess of Normandy and Aquitaine, and countess of Anjou, to the archbishops, bishops, counts, vicounts, barons, seneschals, provosts, justiciaries, bailiffs, all in the present and future to whom these letters will come, greetings.
Know that we have granted and confirmed in perpetuity by this our present charter to all our beloved and faithful people of Oleron and their heirs, that they may act as they will legally and securely in perpetuity in giving their girls and widows in marriage and marrying their boys, and having stewardship of their girls and widows and boys, without opposition from us and our heirs.
We have granted also that it is permitted to them and their heirs to sell and dispose of in whatever way their road and their salt and all other saleable things, with no one preventing them.  We have also granted to them and their heirs that, they divide their things and possessions in their last testaments according to their will or the will of their friends, if perhaps any of them, being killed or otherwise prevented, should not have the copy or the ability of disposing of that testament.
Also all bad customs which were imposed on Oleron, when our venerable and illustrious husband, Lord Henry King of England contracted marriage with us, we break in perpetuity and abolish completely; willing and ordering that said men of Oleron, and their heirs may have and keep the just and free customs of their land as their ancestors held under the dominion of our ancestors.
That this our grant, or confirmation, have perpetual authority and full strength, we have had this charter marked with our seal.
Dated at Les Andelys, in the year of the incarnation of the Word, 1199.
Witnesses:
Lord Henry, bishop of Saintes,
Peter Bertin, then Seneschal of Poitou,
Launo Ogerio,
Chalon of Rochefort,
Geoffrey of Chauvigny,
Humbert of Fouras (?Forum),
William Bormant,
John Roilloy,
John Vitale,
John Joselin,
and many others.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Alienora, Dei gratia, humilia Regina Angliae, Ducissa Normaniae & Aquitaniae, & Comitissa Andegaviae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Vicecomitibus, Baronibus, Senescallis, Praepositis, Justiciariis, Ballivis universis, tam futuris, quam praesentibus, ad quos litterae istae pervenerint, salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse, & praesenti Carta nostra in perpetuum confirmasse dilectis & fidelibus nostris universis hominibus de Olerone & eorum Haredibus, ut de puellis & viduis suis nuptui tradendis, & de masculis suis uxorandis, & de Ballio puellarum, et viduarum, & masculorum suorum habendo, sine nostri & nostrorum Haeredum contradictione, ad voluntatem suam licite faciant in perpetuum & secure.
Concessimus etiam ut ipsis & eorum Haeredibus via sua, & sal suum, & omnes caeteras res venales, nullius obstante inhibitione, vendere & quolibet modo distrahere liceat.
Concessimus etiam ipsis & eorum Haeredibus ut, in ultimis testamentis suis, res & possessiones suas dividant ad voluntatem suam vel ad voluntatem amicorum suorum, si forte aliqui ex eis, praeoccupati vel occisi, copiam & posse non habuerint testamentum ipsum disponendi.
Omnes etiam pravas consuetudines, quae apud Oleronem impositae sunt, ex quo venerabilis & illustris vir noster Dominus Henricus Rex Angliae nobiscum matrimonium contraxit, quassamus imperpetuum & penitus abolemus; volentes & praecipientes ut praedicti homines de Olerone, et eorum Haeredes justas & liberas consuetudines terrae suae custodiant & habeant, sicut Antecessores eorum sub nostorum antecessorum dominio tenuerunt.
Ut autem haec nostra concessio, sive confirmatio, perpetuam auctoritatem & plenum robur optineat, nos Cartam istam sigillo nostro fecimus insigniri.  Datum apud Andiliacum, Anno Incarnati Verbi Millesimo Centesimo Nonagesimo Nono.
Testibus,
Domino Henrico Xanctonen. Episcopo,
Petro Bertino tunc Senescallo Pictaviae,
Launo Ogerio,
Chalone de Rochforti,
Gaufrido de Cauvigne,
Hymberto de Forum,
Willelmo Bormant,
Johanne Roilloy,
Johanne Vitale,
Johanne Joselino,
Et multis aliis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The queen grants privileges in marriage, charges, and disposition of possessions to the people of Oleron, returning to the customs that prevailed when they were under the dominion of her family, before her marriage to Henry.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera,</em> 1.36 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1199