---
letter_id: "24573"
title: "A letter from Henry III, king of England (2/5/1260)"
ititle: "a letter from henry iii, king of england (2/5/1260)"
ltr_date: "2/5/1260"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/868.html"
senders:
  - id: 21384
    name: Henry III, king of England
    iname: henry iii, king of england
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the queen of France, greetings and affection of sincere love.
Since we have proposed the desire of our mind with pure affection and heart no less than intention, entering a pact of peace, love, and unity between your Lord and ours, the illustrious king of France, and us; having faith completely in that Lord, relative, and friend:
We seek and ask your sincerity attentively to apply to and press your aforesaid Lord, with the help of his prayers, through the support and aid of the highest Pontiff, to fulfill the vow of our crusade and the service of God, to which we have devoted our purpose, so that we may be able to act better and more perfectly.
We ask moreover that you may wish to hold commended our messengers, whom we send to said Lord King for the act of peace begun between him and us, and give them most kindly help and aid, in the accustomed way, in those things which remain to be done or finished about said business.
Witnessed by the King at Westminster, 5th day of February.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Reginae Franciae Rex salutem, & sincerae dilectionis affectum.
Cum circa foedus pacis, dilectionis, & unitatis inter Dominum vestrum & nostrum, Regem Franciae illustrem, & nos ineundum, nostrae mentis desiderium affectu puro, & corde posuerimus non minus intento; in eo, tanquam Domino, consanguineo, & amico, fiduciam habentes ex toto:
Sinceritatem vestram attente requirimus & rogamus quatinus erga praedictum Dominum vestrum instare, & opem impendere ut, suarum precum adminiculo, per summi Pontificis subsidium & juvamen, votum crucis nostrae explere, & Dei servitium, ad quod intentionem nostram devovimus, perfectius & melius peragere valeamus.
Rogamus insuper ut Nuncios nostros, quos ad praefatum Dominum Regem, pro facto pacis, inter nos & ipsum initae, destinamus, commendatos habere, & eis auxilium, & juvamen, more solito, in hiis, quae de dicto negotio facienda restant seu perficienda, benignius impendere velitis.
Teste Rege apud Westm. 5 die Februarii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Henry asks his sister-in-law, the queen of France, to help persuade her husband to agree to the peace negotiations between them, so that the promised Crusade can be undertaken.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer,<em> Foedera,</em> 1.2.56</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>2/5/1260