---
letter_id: "24579"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Provence (1265, February 14.)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of provence (1265, february 14.)"
ltr_date: "1265, February 14."
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-06"
url: "/letter/874.html"
senders:
  - id: 76
    name: Eleanor of Provence
    iname: eleanor of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/76.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Eleanor by the grace of God, queen of England, lady of Ireland, and duchess of Aquitaine, to all who will see the present letters, greetings in the eternal lord.
You will know that our beloved mayor, commune, and men of the priory of St. George of Oleron, freely granted us for the help of our lord king and our most beloved son Edward, 390 pounds of Poitevin money, when they were least held to this by debt:
therefore, so that they not be incommoded at all by their courtesy, we promise them that the provision of this kind of help will not be carried over to them or their successors;
nor will anything be required later by our said lord King and Edward, or their successors, from that mayor, commune, and men of said priory, by reason of said help.
In witness of which we have caused these our letters patent to be made.
Dated at St. Macarius, 14th of February, in the 49th year of the reign of our lord king H.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>A. Dei gratia, Regina Angliae, Domina Hiberniae, & Ducissa Aquit. Universis, praesentes litteras inspecturis, salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Noveritis quod dilecti nobis Major, & Communia, ac homines Prioris Sancti Georgii de Olerone, nobis pro succursu faciendo Domino nostro Regi & Edwardo Filio nostro karissimo trescentas, quater viginti, & decem libras monetae Pictaven. voluntate spontanea, concesserunt, cum ad hoc ex debito minime tenerentur:
Ut igitur ex curialitate sua nullum possint incommodum reportare, promittimus eisdem quod hujusmodi succursus praestatio, eis vel eorum successoribus ad consequentiam non trahetur;
Nec a dictis Domino nostro Rege & Edwardo, vel eorum Successoribus ab ipsis Majore, Communia & hominibus dicti Prioris, ratione succursus praedicti, aliquid ex debito in posterum exigetur.
In cujus rei testimonium has nostras litteras fieri fecimus patentes.
Dat. apud Sanctum Macharium, 14 die Febri. anno Regni Regis H. Domini nostri 49.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The queen records the money freely given by the mayor, people, and priory of Oleron to help the king and prince in their captivity and promises that the payment will not set a precedent for later claims by the king or prince on them or their successors.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em>, 1.2.94 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1265, February 14.