---
letter_id: "24580"
title: "A letter from Edward I, king of England (1281, October 10)"
ititle: "a letter from edward i, king of england (1281, october 10)"
ltr_date: "1281, October 10"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-13"
url: "/letter/875.html"
senders:
  - id: 21314
    name: Edward I, king of England
    iname: edward i, king of england
    type: people
    url: /people/21314.html
receivers:
  - id: 73
    name: Marguerite of Provence
    iname: marguerite of provence
    type: woman
    url: /woman/73.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the queen of France, Edward King, etc.
Lady, we have heard well and know well that you have made great effort to have love between your late lord and our lord King, our father; and between our lord who is now King your son, and us, and you have given great understanding to that love; for which we thank you as much as we can and know how.
And in that, Lady, that you desire, that there be an alliance between your son and us, to affirm good love between us more; we are very grateful to you and we can not send you an answer to that since our council was not nearby when your letters arrived.
And in that, Lady, that you wish Sir John of Greilly to remain with you, so that he may come to us five weeks from St. Michel; know, dear Lady, that it pleases us much and that we have sent to him, by lettre, that he do your will, and come to us on the day named above.
Given/dated at Winchester the 10th of October, the 9th year of our reign.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>A La Reyne de Fraunce, Edward Rey, &c.
Dame, bien avons entendu, & bien savons ke grant poer avez mis de mettre bon amur par entre vostre Seigneur ke fust, & nostre Seignur le Roy jadis nostre pere; & par entre nostre Seignur le Roy vostre filz, qui ore est, e nus, e grant entent avez mis pur cel amur; de quoi nus vus mercions tant com nus poons & savons.
Et de ceo, Dame, ke vus desirez, ke aliaunce fust par rentre vostre filz & nus, pur plus affermer bon amur par entre nus; grant gre nus en savons, e respons de co ne vus poons maunder, pur co ke nostre conseil ne fu pas pres de nus, quant voz lettres nus vindrent.
E pur co, Dame, ke vus voillez ke Sire Johan de Greilly demurge uncore od vus, issi, qu'il puisse venir a nus a cink Semeignes de la Seint Michel; Sachez, chere Dame, ke il nus plest mut, e nus lui avons maunde, par nostre lettre, ke il face vostre volunte, e qu'il vienge a nus al' jur avant nomee.
Donee a Wincestre le Disme jur de Octobre, le an de nostre Regne 9.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The king thanks his aunt for her continued efforts towards friendship between his late father and her late husband, and between himself and her son the current king of France, but puts off an answer on a new alliance until he can consult with his council.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>Rymer, <em>Foedera</em> 1.2.196 (3rd ed.).</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1281, October 10