---
letter_id: "23798"
title: "A letter from Ivo of Chartres (1102-07)"
ititle: "a letter from ivo of chartres (1102-07)"
ltr_date: "1102-07"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2017-08-23"
url: "/letter/88.html"
senders:
  - id: 21424
    name: Ivo of Chartres
    iname: ivo of chartres
    type: people
    url: /people/21424.html
receivers:
  - id: 21
    name: Adela of England, Countess of Blois
    iname: adela of england, countess of blois
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Ivo, humble minister of the church of Chartres to Adela noble countess, greetings.
With all worldly cupidity put aside, I praise your pious intention to the effect that you, having set all worldly cupidity aside, desire to restore to its former state the church of St. Martin au Val which was once a monastery.  At the same time I advise that what you piously desire you strive with due care to bring to a swift conclusion, lest the ancient enemy obstruct your intention and prevent it reaching the desired end.  I meanwhile promise my counsel and aid in the completion of this undertaking to the extent that reason and opportunity permit.  Fare well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>I[vo], humilis Ecclesiae Carnotensis minister, A[delae] nobili comitissae salutem.
Remota omni mundana cupiditate, piam vestram intentionem laudato quod ecclesiam S. Martini de Valle, quae olim monasterium fuit, in antiquum statum reformare desideratis;  simulque consulo ut quod pie desideratis, ad celerem effectum caute perducere studeatis, ne antiquus hostis intentionem vestram praepediat et ad desideratum finem pervenire non sinat.  Ego enim ad hoc implendum, pro ut ratio et facultas permiserit, et consilium promitto et auxilium. Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>The bishop supports Adela's desire to restore a church in her domain. She did not act on it, see LoPrete, <em>Adela</em>, 250-51 and 497-500, #98.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>PL162 add. ep.2, c288-89.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1102-07