---
letter_id: "24597"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Aquitaine (1140, December 28)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of aquitaine (1140, december 28)"
ltr_date: "1140, December 28"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-09-19"
url: "/letter/893.html"
senders:
  - id: 24
    name: Eleanor of Aquitaine
    iname: eleanor of aquitaine
    type: woman
    url: /woman/24.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>I Eleanor, queen of the Franks, and daughter of William duke of Aquitaine, have granted and confirmed by this stamp* the gift as the king my husband granted it to the church of Blessed Mary of Saintes, to be held in perpetuity by St. Mary and Agnes, my aunt, abbess of that place, and all her successors, I confirmed it on the same day not in the same place:  with witnesses Aienric (Henry?) of Niela, Aelith my sister, Maengo of Bono Occulo, Arveo my steward, and many others.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ego Helienordis, Francorum regina, et Willelmi ducis Aquitanici filia, hoc donum, sicut rex vir meus concessit Beate Marie Xancton[ensi] ecclesie, sic concessi et hujus [sign of cross] impressione confirmavi, et in perpetuo habendum Sancte Marie et Agneti amite mee ejusdem loci abbatisse, et omnibus ejus successoribus in eadem die, non in eodem loco, confirmavi; videntibus Aienrico de Niela, Aelith, sorore mea, Maengo de Bono Occulo, Arveo panetario, et pluribus aliis.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Eleanor confirms the grant of her husband king Louis to her aunt, Agnes, abbess of Notre Dame de Saintes. Aelith/Alix is another name for Eleanor's younger (and only known sister) Petronilla. Alix is the name Petronilla used after her marriage. I am grateful to Professor Constance Berman for pointing this out. This charter was presented at a meeting of the Medieval Academy of America by Janet Martindale, in a paper "Eleanor of Aquitaine, Queen of the French and Duchess of Aquitaine (1137-1152)," on April 3, 2008.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Translation notes:</h2><p>* The sign of the cross, according to Martindale.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Cartulaires inedits de la Saintonge,</em> ed. L'Abbe Th., Grasilier, v.2 (Niort, 1874), pp.50-51.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1140, December 28