---
letter_id: "24599"
title: "A letter from Eleanor of Aquitaine (1141)"
ititle: "a letter from eleanor of aquitaine (1141)"
ltr_date: "1141"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-28"
url: "/letter/895.html"
senders:
  - id: 24
    name: Eleanor of Aquitaine
    iname: eleanor of aquitaine
    type: woman
    url: /woman/24.html
receivers:
  - id: 21531
    name: Public
    iname: public
    type: people
    url: /people/21531.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In the name of the holy and individual trinity, I Eleanor, by the grace of God humble queen of the Franks, and duchess of the Aquitainians.  We make known to all men, future as well as present, that with the assent of Louis King of the Franks and duke of the Aquitainians, our relative, and Aelith our sister, at the petition of abbess Agnes, we grant to the nuns always serving the Virgin Mary in our city of Saintes their possessions and lands which they have or will acquire, to be possessed freely so that not we, not our provosts, not our retinue, not our foresters, not any man of ours or anyone else has further right of lodging, tax on domiciles, maintenance, expedition/ escort by horse, army or anything else, by force or terror.  Lest through deputy, [there be] homicide, theft, seizure, arson, we thoroughly put an end to those.  We also ask that all prelates of the universal church to whom these letters come defend this privilege with their privileges; and if any person should act against this statute, they excommunicate  that person with all his perpetrators by the authority of God and their own.

Enacted at Paris in the thousand one hundred forty first year from the incarnation of the Lord, in our palace in the presence of those whose names are enscribed below.

Sign* of the count Ralph of Vermandois, Sign of William, butler, Sign of Matthew constable, Sign of Cadurc chancellor of the king of the Franks, Sign of Peter our chaplain and chancellor.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>In nomine sancte et individue Trinitatis, ego Helienordis, Dei gratia humilis Francorum regina, et Aquitanorum ducissa.

Notum facimus omnibus hominibus tam presentibus quam futuris, quod assensu Ludovici Regis Francorum et ducis Aquitanorum collateralis nostri et Aelith sororis nostre, peticione Agnetis abbatisse, monialibus apud civitatem nostrum Xanctonas semper Virgini Marie servientibus possessiones et terras earum, quascumque habent vel acquisierint, sic libere concedimus possidendas, ut nec nos, nec prepositi nostri, nec famuli, nec forestarii, nec ullus homo noster, vel aliquis alius ibi nec arbergamentum, aut questam, aut procurationem, aut cavaugadam, aut exercitum, aut quidlibet aliud vi, aut terrore ulterius habeamus.  Quin etiam vigeriam, scilicet de homicidio, de furto, de raptu, de incendio, prorsus finimus illis.  Rogamus itaque omnes prelator universalis ecclesie ad quos littere iste pervenerint, quatinus hoc privilegium suis muniant privilegiis; et si aliqua persona contra hoc statutum fecerit, eam, cum omnibus factoribus suis, ex auctoritate Dei et sua, excommunicent.

Actum Parisiis anno millesimo C.XLI ab incarnatione Domini, astantibus in palacio nostro quorum hic nomina subscripta sunt.  Signum* comitis Viromandorum, S. Willelmi buticularii, S. Mathei constabularii, S. Cadurci cancellarii regis Francorum, S. Petri capellani et cancellarii nostri.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Eleanor confirms the possessions of the nuns of Notre Dame de Saintes, declares them free of any impositions by her people, and enjoins the church to support her protection with its authority.

This charter was presented at a meeting of the Medieval Academy of America by Janet Martindale, in a paper "Eleanor of Aquitaine, Queen of the French and Duchess of Aquitaine (1137-1152)," on April 3, 2008.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>* The sign is a cross.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Cartulaires inedits de la Saintonge</em>, ed. L'Abbe Th., Grasilier, v.2 (Niort, 1874), pp.36.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1141