---
letter_id: "24603"
title: "A letter from and Richard of Cornwall (1254)"
ititle: "a letter from and richard of cornwall (1254)"
ltr_date: "1254"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/899.html"
senders:
  - id: 21240
    name: Richard of Cornwall
    iname: richard of cornwall
    type: people
    url: /people/21240.html
receivers:
  - id: 21381
    name: Henry III
    iname: henry iii
    type: people
    url: /people/21381.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the Lord King of England, etc. the Queen and Richard Count of Cornwall, greetings.
We have received your letters at Christmas just past, that on next St. Hilary we should convene the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Counts, and Barons of the Kingdom of England:  to make known to them your situation and the coming of the King of Castile into Gascony against you.
And since the shortness of time did not allow said Magnates to come together on said day, we summoned them to Westminster fifteen days after said Feast of St. Hilary.
When they had gathered and the advent of said King and your situation had been laid out to them, we received the answer that the Counts and Barons will be in London in three weeks from next Easter, ready to go promply to Portsmouth, to embark on ships to come strongly to your aid against said King of Castile:  if said King of Castile should come to attack you in Gascony.
And the Count of Gloucester (?) and all the other magnates promised this.  Moreover the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop Elect of Winton, the Bishops of London and Worcester
promised that they would come to you personally in main force.
And the other Bishops and Abbots of England present there promised that they would forcefully support you with their money against said King of Castile; but they did not wish to name the sum.  But whoever has the sum will give give it at London at the term fixed, that is, three weeks from Easter, as they steadily asserted; if it should be that said King of Castile comes against you in Gascony.
But among their Clerics, they did not wish to make any concession to you about the tithe to be collected for your need in aid to the Holy Land, soon.
We, indeed, with your queen, will come to you according to your command with Edward your son and Beatrice your daughter, and I your brother Richard Count of Cornwall will not fail you; but I shall come to you with force, as you order me, for your advantage and my honor:  so that you and your Heirs will be grateful to me, God willing, in perpetuity, if said King of Castile should attack you in Gascony.
And by the counsel of the Lady Queen and your other wellwishers, I shall place your Kingdom of England in good and faithful hands, God willing, to your benefit and honor.
And if it please you and seems good that the Lady Queen come in the same transport of your Magnates and Barons of England, make this known soon, if it please you:  so that she may come more safely and suitably to you with your son Edward and your daughter Beatrice.
The aforesaid Prelates and Magnates wish to have your patent letters before they make the journey and give aid, to be sent by you from Gascony;  so that from the present financial help they give you and what they do for you, there will be no prejudice later to their successors or heirs in your time or the time of your heirs.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Domino Regi Angliae, &c Regina & Richardus Comes Cornubiae, salutem.
Recepimus litteras vestras ad natale Domini proxime praeteritum, quod in crastino sancti Hillarii convocaremus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, Comites, & Barones Regni Angliae:  ad ostendendum eis statum vestrum, & adventum Regis Castellae in Vasconiam contra vos.
Et, quia brevitas temporis non patiebatur quod dicti Magnates ad dictum diem possent convenire, vocavimus eosdem apud Westmonasterium in quindena dicti Festi sancti Hillarii.
Quibus congregatis, & expositis eis adventu dicti Regis & statu vestro; responsum recepimus, quod Comites & Barones erunt Londoniae a die Paschae proximo futurae in tres septimanas, parati indilate tendere versus Portesmuam, ascensuri naves ad veniendum potenter in succursum vestrum, contra dictum Regem Castellae:  Si dictus Rex Castellae, contra vos in Vasconiam sit venturus.
Et hoc promiserunt Comes Gloverniae, & omnnes alii Magnates.
Praeterea Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, Electus Wintoniensis, Londoniensis, & Wigornensis Episcopi, promiserunt se personaliter ad voc accessuros in manu forti.
Et alii Episcopi & Abbates Angliae tunc praesentes, promiserunt quod efforcialiter vobis subvenirent de pecunia sua, contra dictum Regem Castellae; summam tamen tunc exprimere noluerunt:  Sed quilibet habebit summam, quam daturus est, Londoniae in termino praenotato, hoc est, a die Paschae in tres septimanas, sicut constanter asseruerunt; si ita sit quod dictus Rex Castellae contra vos in Vasconia sit venturus.
Sed de Clericis suis nullam vobis voluerunt facere concessionem, propter decimam colligendam, ad opus vestrum, in subsidium Terrae sanctae, in proximum.
Nos vero, cum regina vestra, ad vos veniemus juxta mandatum vestrum:  Et Edwardus filius vester, & Beatrix filia vestra, & ego frater vester Richardus Comes Cornubiae vobis non deficiam; sed ad vos veniam cum potestate, ad vestrum profestum & honorem meum:  Ita quod vos & Haeredes vestri, mihi scietis grates, Deo dante, imperpetuum, si dictus Rex Castellae contra vos in Vasconia sit venturus, sicut mihi mandatis.
Et, per Consilium Dominae Reginae, & aliorum benevolorum vestrorum, dimittam Regnum vestrum Angliae in bonis manibus & fidelibus, Deo dante, ad vestrum commodum & honorem.
Et, si vobis placet, & bonum videatur, quod Domina Regina veniat in communi passagio Magnatum & Baronum vestrorum Angliae, hoc ei tempestive significetis, si placet:  Ut sic ad vos cum Edwardo filio vestro, & Beatrice filia vestra, securius & decentius venire valeat.
Volunt autem praefati Praelati & Magnates, ante passagium suum, & auxilium dandum, habere litteras vestras patentes, sibi de Vasconia mittendas; quod ex praesenti subventione vobis persolvenda, & in rebus facienda, non fiat in posterum ipsis successoribus seu haeredibus suis praejudicium, tempore vestro vel haeredum vestrorum.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Eleanor and the king's brother, Richard, announce to Henry that they have convened the secular and religious magnates in order to procure their aid, military and financial, for the king in Gascony, if he is attacked by the King of Castile.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>Thomas Rymer, Foedera, Conventiones, Literae, 1.1.177
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1254