---
letter_id: "23719"
title: "A letter from Constance, countess of Toulouse (1165)"
ititle: "a letter from constance, countess of toulouse (1165)"
ltr_date: "1165"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2020-04-27"
url: "/letter/9.html"
senders:
  - id: 3
    name: Constance of France, countess of Toulouse
    iname: constance of france, countess of toulouse
    type: woman
    url: /woman/3.html
receivers:
  - id: 21455
    name: Louis VII, King of France
    iname: louis vii, king of france
    type: people
    url: /people/21455.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To Louis, by the grace of God king of France, her venerable lord and brother,
C[onstance], his only sister, greetings in Christ.
I have seen your letters, glorious father, glorious brother.  If the promise in them is soon kept, I, who have long been unfortunate, will be very fortunate and happy.  Yet I fear that the words of my messengers and yours deceive me with their promises.  To expel that fear, I humbly pour out what prayers I can to you, that you not forget your pitiful sister, and believe Mostorol as you believe me.  He indeed knows our secrets.
Fare well.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ludovico, Dei gratia excellentismo Regi Francae, venerabili domino et fratri suo C. ejus unica soror, salutes in Christo. Literas vestras, inclyte pater, inclyte frater, vidi. Quarum promissio si in proximo compleretur, ego, quae infortunata diu steterim, felix et fortunata valde forem. Timeo tamen ne verba nunciorum meorum et vestrorum me promissionibus suis decipiant. Ut autem timor meus expellatur, preces quam possum vobis humiliter effundo, quatinus me miseram sororem vestram oblivioni non tradatis, et Mostorolum tamquam me credatis. Ipse siquidem secreta nostra scit. Valete.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Constance begs Louis to keep the promises he has made to her by letter.  Constance was apparently in Paris in 1165 and stood as a godmother to Louis's son Philip Augustus.  There are two letters from Toulouse, one from the citizens, the other from the communal council asking Louis to return their countess to them (HGF16, epp.392, 393).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>HGF 16 ep.391, p.126-27, dated 1165
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1165