---
letter_id: "23801"
title: "A letter from Hildebert of Lavardin (1104)"
ititle: "a letter from hildebert of lavardin (1104)"
ltr_date: "1104"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-16"
url: "/letter/91.html"
senders:
  - id: 21399
    name: Hildebert of Lavardin
    iname: hildebert of lavardin
    type: people
    url: /people/21399.html
receivers:
  - id: 21
    name: Adela of England, Countess of Blois
    iname: adela of england, countess of blois
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>In your husband’s absence, care for the county burdens you more heavily.  It compels you to give yourself over to different things with more agility in soul/mind than in body.(1)  Uncertain therefore in which place I might find you, but certain that wherever it is I will find observance of honorable conduct residing there; I gave the letters to a lady,(2) of which this is the gist:  “it was reported that you provided a safe-conduct/escort to the bishop of Chartres to travel to a council; if this is so, I entreat you to impart benefice of the same grace to me.”  Symmachus says:  “Experience makes those who desire help go to known providers.”  So I have flown to your patronage/protection who are such an example and instrument of virtue over all women.  The relics of the good world are alive in you, in whom your sex breathes glory and your family retains its slipping dignity.  I might be accused of lying except that some of the best men concur in this judgment.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Absentia mariti laboriosior tibi cura consulatus incumbit. Ea enim magis animo quam corpore ad diversa te demigrare compellit. Incertus igitur ubi locorum invenirem te, certus autem quod honestatis obsequia ubique invenirem apud te, domi residens ad dorninam literas dedi , quarum summa haec est. Episcopo Carnotensi conductum, sicut fertur, providisti ad concilium profecturo. Quod si ita est, praefatae gratiae benefìcium mihi communices exoro. Symmachus dicit: Ex usu venit ut opem desiderantes ad suffragia probata confugiant. Eapropter ad tuum patrocinium transvolavi, quae tota super feminam et exemplum virtutis es et instrumentum. Vivunt in te boni saeculi reliquiae, per quam et sexus respirat ad gloriam, et genus elabentem retinet dignitatem. Arguerer mendacii, nisijusque optimi mecum in hoc judicium conveniret.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Hildebert asks Adela for a safe-conduct.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2><p>(1)LoPrete translates the letter in fn.98 of "Adela of Blois: Familial Alliances and Female Lordship," <em>Aristocratic Women in Medieval France</em>, ed. Theodore Evergates. (2)LoPrete divides the syntax differently and takes the “lady” to refer to Adela, the ruling lord: “Since I am at home, I send letters to the lord . . .”.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>PL171 ep.3.8 c288-89; also HGF15 ep.6 p.316, same text
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1104