---
letter_id: "24621"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-09"
url: "/letter/918.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 89
    name: Radegund of Thuringia
    iname: radegund of thuringia
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To Lady Radegund
Radegund, powerful in the world, from a royal line,
to whom other kingdoms remain to be held in the heavens,
despising the world, you merited to acquire Christ,
and while you are hidden enclosed, you see him over the stars.
You trample on the harmful joys of the earthly kingdom,
that happy you might please the king with heaven well-disposed.
Now you hold narrow [spaces], by which you will enter more widely the heavens:
pouring out tears you reap true joys.
And you crucify the body, fasts nourish the soul,
only that her lord preserve with love.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Ad domnam Radegundem
Regali de stripe potens Radegundis in orbe,
altera cui caelis regna tenenda manent,
despiciens mundum meruisti adquirere Christum,
et dum clausa lates, hinc super astra vides.
Gaudia terreni conculcas noxia regni,
ut placeas regi laeta favente polo.
Nunc angusta tenes, quo caelos largior intres:
diffundens lacrimas gaudia vera metes.
Et corpus crucias, animam ieiunia pascunt,
solo quam dominus servat amore suus.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Radegund and Agnes, whom Radegund had had installed as her abbess, when he visited Poitiers.  They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died.  After her death, Fortunatus wrote a life of Radegund emphasizing her ascetic qualities.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Venanti Fortunati Opera Poetica</em>, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin: Weidmann, 1881), 193, Librum VIII, v.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567