---
letter_id: "24627"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-03-04"
url: "/letter/924.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 89
    name: Radegund of Thuringia
    iname: radegund of thuringia
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>[To the same when she returned]
From where did the face return to me with radiant light?
What delays held you too long absent from me?
You took away with you, you call back my joys with you,
and make the Easter day twice celebrated.
Though the seeds now begin to rise from the furrows,
I reap today seeing you here again.
I already collect the fruits, I compose gentle bundles:
what the month of August usually does, April enacts;
and though now the bud and the tendril first come out,
my autumn and the grape have come at the same time.
The apple and the high peartree now pour out pleasing scents,
but with the new flower they bear fruits to me already.
Though the new field is adorned by no grains,
yet all shine full with you returning.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[Ad eandem cum rediit]
Unde mihi rediit radianti lumine vultus?
quae nimis absentem te tenuere morae?
abstuleras tecum, revocas mea gaudia tecum,
paschalemque facis bis celebrare diem.
quam incipiant modo surgere semina sulcis,
hic egomet hodie te revidendo meto.
colligo iam fruges, placidos conpono maniplos:
quod solet Augustus mensis, Aprilis agit;
et licet in primis modo gemma et pampinus exit,
iam meus autumnus venit et uva simul.
malus et alta pirus gratos modo fundit odores,
sed cum flore novo iam mihi poma ferunt.
quamvis nudus ager nullis ornetur aristis,
omnia plena tamen te redeunte nitent.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Radegund and Agnes, whom Radegund had had installed as her abbess, when he visited Poitiers.  They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died.  After her death, Fortunatus wrote a life of Radegund emphasizing her ascetic qualities.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>Venanti Fortunati Opera Poetica, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin:  Weidmann, 1881), 195-96, Librum VIII, x.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567