---
letter_id: "24641"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-09"
url: "/letter/939.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
    url: /people/21338.html
receivers:
  - id: 89
    name: Radegund of Thuringia
    iname: radegund of thuringia
    type: woman
    url: /woman/89.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>If I can not be present, absent I send you tribute,
that my beloved mother may prove my affection.
If I were not [absent], I would do whatever you ordered:
the unskilled would perhaps please with small services;
with devoted breast but rustic tongue he would give
a sound for the ear of the mother with the pen of a shepherd;
serving daily commands, I would wear out my limbs,
the subject necks would serve their lady;
the fingers would refuse nothing, in the deep well
the prompt hand that wrote this would wash waters,      10
drag vines and fix shoots in the gardens.
It was splendor to burn my limbs in the kitchen with you
and wash the black vessels [with water] from the pure lake.
Absent now, I sent gifts of Marcellus to you here,
to whom a blessed life gave the lofty place,
and if the words displease by their unworthy relating,
may supernal signs please your spirit.
May you live long for me with your daughter and crop of sisters,
and may the sheepfold of god grow with the virgin choir.  20
If you would give your words, they would be sweeter than if
bees gave honey from chosen flowers.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Si nequeo praesens, absens tibi solvo tributum,
ut probet affectum, mater amata, meum,
si non essem [absens], facerem quodcumque iuberes:
obsequiis parvis forte placeret iners;
pectore devoto set rustica lingua dedisset
pastoris calamo matris in aure sonum;
imperiis famulans tererem mea membra diurnis,
servirent dominae subdita colla suae;
nulla recusarent digiti, puteoque profundo
quae manus hoc scripsit prompta levaret aquas,      10
protraheret vites et surcula figeret hortis,
plantaret, coleret dulce libenter holus.
splendor erat tecum mea membra ardere coquina
et nigra de puro vasa lavare lacu.
hinc tibi nunc absens Marcelli munera misi,
cui dedit excelsum vita beata locum,
et si displiceant indigno verba relatu,
conplaceant animo signa superna tuo.
sis longaeva mihi cum nata et messe sororum,
virgineoque choro crescat ovile dei.                20
si tua verba dares, essent plus dulcia quam si
floribus electis mella dedisset apes.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Radegund and Agnes, whom Radegund had had installed as her abbess, when he visited Poitiers. They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died. After her death, Fortunatus wrote a life of Radegund emphasizing her ascetic qualities.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Venanti Fortunati Opera Poetica</em>, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin: Weidmann, 1881), 286-87, Appendix, xxii.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567