---
letter_id: "24651"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-19"
url: "/letter/949.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
    url: /people/21338.html
receivers:
  - id: 90
    name: Agnes, abbess of the Holy Cross
    iname: agnes, abbess of the holy cross
    type: woman
    url: /woman/90.html
  - id: 89
    name: Radegund of Thuringia
    iname: radegund of thuringia
    type: woman
    url: /woman/89.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>[Again a verse made in a feast] 
Among the various delights and mixed savor
while I slept and while I ate
(I opened my mouth, closed my eyes again
and chewed seeing many dreams),
I had confused spirits, believe me, dear ones,
I was not able to give free words easily.
I could not with my fingers, nor with a pen paint verses,
the drunken Muse made my hands uncertain.
For to me and other drinkers the wines were so fitting
that the table seemed to swim with the pure [undiluted] wine.
But now, as I could, to the mother and equally to the sister
I have given small songs in sweet conversation.
Although sleep battles me with its many whips,
love drew me to write these with a hesitant hand.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[Item versus in convivio factus] 
Inter delicias varias mixtumque saporem
dum dormitarem dumque cibarer ego
(os aperiebam, claudebam rursus ocellos
et manducabam somnia plura videns),
confusos animos habui, mihi credite, carae,
nec valui facile libera verba dare.
non digitis poteram, calamo neque pingere versus,
fecerat incertas ebria Musa manus.
nam mihi vel reliquis sic vina bibentibus apta
ipsa videbatur mensa natare mero.
nunc tamen, ut potui, matri pariterque sorori
alloquio dulci carmina parva dedi.
etsi me somnus multis inpugnat habenis,
haec dubitante manu scribere traxit amor.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Agnes and her patron, Radegund, when he visited Poitiers. They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died. After her death, Fortunatus wrote a life of Radegund emphasizing her ascetic qualities.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Venanti Fortunati Opera Poetica</em>, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin: Weidmann, 1881), 267, Librum XI,xxiii.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567