---
letter_id: "24658"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-19"
url: "/letter/956.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 90
    name: Agnes, abbess of the Holy Cross
    iname: agnes, abbess of the holy cross
    type: woman
  - id: 89
    name: Radegund of Thuringia
    iname: radegund of thuringia
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>[To the same about his trip]
The moments of men are turned by innumerable events
and life, swinging, moves with unstable step.
The tottering mind anxious for future things
does not know what will come, what the light prepares for it.
For the loving Eomund, when I had gone away from you,
received me with his customary goodness.
From here, rushing swiftly, I was brought to the halls of Cariacum;
from there I was carried to Tincillac.
Here the holy bishop Domitian seized me,
bringing me to the joyful feasts of St. Albin.                        10
Set free from there, tired by many dangers
the flood and storm acted on the little boat,
the heavy North wind, pressing, overturned the torrent
and the wave carried the curved bays badly;
and the shores did not hold the aroused floods
and the waters pouring out invade the new earth.
Pastures, country, groves, cornfields, wandering trees, willow stands,
one grasp holds [all] with angry force.
Here with me committed to the sea, through rough growling
the unloosed winter-storm roared with horrifying blasts       20
and rose, the poop falling through watery peaks,
climbing the liquid roads with the wandering mountain;
how with the raft suspended, now clouds held the sailor,
with the raging pool subsiding, he came back again to the fields.
With the storm spouting dangerous floods of the sea
the prow drank the rapid waters assiduously;
waters bathed the keel in hostile peace,
that would harm us more gravely with its embrace.
But no delay permits [me] to remember the various complaints:
I hide the grumbling in my heart to be brought forth later.   30
May divine power offer this to me especially,
that I may be able to see you happy ones again.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[Ad easdem de itinere suo]
Casibus innumeris hominum momenta rotantur
instabilique gradu pendula vita meat.
ipsa futurarum titubans mens anxia rerum
ventura ignorat quid sibi lux pariat.
nam me digressum a vobis Eomundus amator
illa suscepit qua bonitate solet.
hinc citus excurrens Cariacae devehor aulae;
Tincillacensi perferor inde loco.
hinc sacer antistes rapuit me Domitianus,
ad sancti Albini gaudia festa trahens. 10
inde relaxatus, per plura pericula fessum
puppe sub exigua fluctus et imber agit,
quo gravis incumbens Aquilo subverterart amnem
et male curvatos extulit unda sinus;
nec sua commotos capiebant litora fluctus:
invadunt terras aequora fusa novas.
pascua rura nemus segetes viburna salictum
viribus iratis una rapina tenet.
huc mihi commisso per confraga murmura ponti
flatibus horrificis laxa fremebat hiems 20
surgebatque cadens per aquosa cacumina puppis,
ascendens liquidas monte vagante vias;
quo rate suspensa modo nubila nauta tenebat,
gurgite subducto rursus ad arva redit.
fluctibus infestis pelagi spumante procella
assidue rapidas prora bibebat aquas;
aequora lambebant inimica pace carinam,
tristius amplexu nos nocitura suo.
sed mora nulla vetat varias memorare querellas:
post referenda simul murmura corde tego. 30
hoc mihi praecipue divina potentia praestet,
ut cito felices vos revidere queam.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Agnes and her patron, Radegund, when he visited Poitiers. They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died. After her death, Fortunatus wrote a life of Radegund emphasizing her ascetic qualities.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Venantii Fortunati, Opera Poetica</em>, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin: Weidmann, 1881), 268-69, Librum XI, xxv.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567