---
letter_id: "24660"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-06-05"
url: "/letter/958.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
    url: /people/21338.html
receivers:
  - id: 90
    name: Agnes, abbess of the Holy Cross
    iname: agnes, abbess of the holy cross
    type: woman
    url: /woman/90.html
  - id: 89
    name: Radegund of Thuringia
    iname: radegund of thuringia
    type: woman
    url: /woman/89.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>We proceed to see the enclosed lands from the waters,
to which the wandering Ocean carries and carries [us] back in turn,
when the sea rises to the sky with constant floods,
the moving wave howls with its fierceness;
the sandy shore flees, now the heaving water receives [us],
now, while the sea swells the shipwrecked earth lies hidden;
as the cold departs, the heart takes its place,
and there are three gifts of god for this one place.
Though it may be sterile, she brings blessed fruits,
while the sand feeds worthy men for heaven.
But I, if I was held in the city without you,
was alone among many thousands.
May I deserve to see you happy, mother and sister,
when the blessed supper of the highest god comes.
So brother Simplicius may return swiftly, I pray,
carry on the work of health mandated by me:
and I ask you to commend me through your sisters:
so may Christ make them all his in love.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Pergimus inclusas a gurgite cernere terras,
qua vagus Oceanus fertque refertque vices,
fluctibus assiduis cum surgit ad aethera pontus,
huc feritate sua mobilis unda latrat;
litus harenosum refugit, nunc suscipit aestus,
nunc, mare dum turget, naufraga terra latet;
quo gelidum abscessit, rediens [hoc] occupat ardor,
atque loco huc uno sunt tria dona dei.
quamvis sit sterilis, fructus fert illa beatos,
dum caelo dignos pascit harena viros.
ast ego vel si qua sine vobis urbe tenerer,
inter multa tamen milia solus eram.
cernere vos laetas merear, materque sororque,
cum venit excelsi cena beata dei.
si citius redeat frater Simplicius, oro,
a me mandatae ferte salutis opus:
et rogo per vestras me commendate sorores:
sic faciat cunctas Christus amore suas.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Agnes and her patron, Radegund, when he visited Poitiers. They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died. After her death, Fortunatus wrote a life of Radegund emphasizing her ascetic qualities.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Venanti Fortunati Opera Poetica</em>, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin: Weidmann, 1881), 289-90, Appendix, xxix.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567