---
letter_id: "24662"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-06-05"
url: "/letter/960.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
    url: /people/21338.html
receivers:
  - id: 90
    name: Agnes, abbess of the Holy Cross
    iname: agnes, abbess of the holy cross
    type: woman
    url: /woman/90.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>[Again to the same]
Mother to me in rank, but sister sweet in love,
whom I cherish with piety, faith, in breast and heart,
with heavenly affection, not with any bodily crime:
not the flesh, but what the spirit desires is what I love.
Christ is witness to this, Peter and Paul ministers,
with her pious comrades holy Mary sees [it],
that you have been to my soul not with other eyes
than if you were Titania, a sister from the womb,
and I was as if in one birth mother Radegund
had borne both, from her chaste innards,
and that the dear breasts of the blessed one
had nourished the two of us equally with one flowing milk.
Alas, I sigh for the harm, lest perhaps with a thin whisper
hurtful words impede my meaning;
but yet I have the spirit to live with a similar wish,
if you wish me to be cherished by [your] sweet love.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[Item aliud ad eandem]
Mater honore mihi, soror autem dulcis amore,
quam pietate fide pectore corde colo,
caelesti affectu, non crimine corporis ullo:
non caro, sed hoc quod spiritus optat amo.
testis adest Christus, Petro Pauloque ministris,
cumque piis sociis sancta Maria videt,
te mihi non aliis oculis animoque fuisse,
quam soror ex utero tu Titania fores,
ac si uno partu mater Radegundis utrosque,
visceribus castis progenuisset, eram,
et tamquam pariter nos ubera cara beatae
pavissent uno lacte fluente duos.
heu mea damna gemo, tenui ne forte susurro
impediant sensum noxia verba meum;
sed tamen est animus simili me vivere voto,
si vos me dulci vultis amore coli.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Agnes and her patron Radegund when he visited Poitiers. They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Venanti Fortunati Opera Poetica</em>, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin: Weidmann, 1881), 260, Librum XI, vi.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567