---
letter_id: "24663"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-06-05"
url: "/letter/961.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 90
    name: Agnes, abbess of the Holy Cross
    iname: agnes, abbess of the holy cross
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>[Another to the abbess about her birthday]
Our sweet adornment, most holy virgin of Christ,
Agnes, who remain immaculate in merits:
did it so please you to spend your time today,
that you would not distribute the customary wealth to me?
not to give the sweet melodies of the lady’s tongue
to one who is nourished by your mouth while you speak the words?
I have also known you to have abstained from food
and I have felt hunger as if for you.
I hear, motionless sleep pressed on the radiant eyes;
or do you fly to anticipate too many nights?
To whom would these long times of rest not suffice,
when near night may hold what day doubled?
The clouds together cover, no moon nor stars are seen;
if you are happy in spirit, the clouds flee from me.
May she reap true joys who ordered us to write these
and [enjoy] favor led with you under the arch of the sky.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[Item aliud ad abbatissam de natali suo]
Dulce decus nostrum, Christi sanctissima virgo,
Agnes quae meritis inmaculata manes:
sic tibi conplacuit hodiernum ducere tempus,
ut mihi nec solitam distribuisses opem?
nec dare nunc dominae modulamina dulcia linguae,
cui dum verba refers pascitur ore tuo?
abstinuisse cibis etiam vos ipse probavi
et quasi pro vobis est mihi facta fames.
audio, somnus iners radiantes pressit ocellos;
an nimias noctes anticipare volis?
cui non sufficiant haec tempora longa quietis,
cum prope nox teneat quod duplicata dies?
nubila cuncta tegunt, nec luna nec astra videntur;
si sis laeta animo, me nebulae fugiunt.
gaudia vera colat quae nos haec scribere iussit
et tecum faveat ducta sub arce poli.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Agnes and her patron Radegund when he visited Poitiers. They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Venanti Fortunati Opera Poetica</em>, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin: Weidmann, 1881), 260, Librum XI, v.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567