---
letter_id: "24669"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-03-27"
url: "/letter/968.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 90
    name: Agnes, abbess of the Holy Cross
    iname: agnes, abbess of the holy cross
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>[Again for milk]
I looked at the fingers fixed/imprinted on the milky gifts,
and the depicted hand stays here where you seize the cream/butter.
Say, I ask, who compelled the tender nails to sculpt [it] so?
Was Daedalus your master  in the art?
O venerable love whose image
comes to me without the form, seized by the maker!
There was hope, but then it broke with the thin covering:
for not a small part was there to be given to me.
May you make these through long years, with the lord giving [them],
and the mother remaining long in this light together.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[Item aliud pro lacte]
Aspexi digitos per lactea munera fixos,
et stat picta manus hic ubi crama rapis.
dic, rogo, quis teneros sic sculpere conpulit ungues?
Daedalus an vobis doctor in arte fuit?
o venerandus amor cuius faciente rapina
subtracta specie venit imago mihi!
spes fuit, haec quoniam tenui se tegmine rupit:
nam neque sic habuit pars mihi parva dari.
haec facias longos domino tribuente per annos,
in hac luce simul matre manente diu.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Agnes and her patron Radegund when he visited Poitiers. They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Venanti Fortunati Opera Poetica</em>, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin: Weidmann, 1881), 264, Librum XI, xiv.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567