---
letter_id: "24673"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-03-27"
url: "/letter/972.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 90
    name: Agnes, abbess of the Holy Cross
    iname: agnes, abbess of the holy cross
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>[About a banquet]
By an act of piety through who piously rules the stars,
through what the mother loves and the brother desires,
that while we take food, whatever you might speak:
which if you do it, I shall be twice satisfied.
[About the same thing]
With various delights I stretched my swollen stomach,
taking everything:  milk, vegetable, eggs, butter.
Now ordered courses are given to me with new feasts,
and the food mixed together pleases more sweetly.
For with the milk they put butter before me:
whence what had been before, the fat is recalled.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[De convivio]
Per pietatis opus, per qui pius imperat astris,
per quod mater amat, frater et ipse cupit,
ut, dum nos escam capimus, quodcumque loquaris:
quod si tu facias, bis satiabor ego.
[Item de eadem re]
Deliciis variis tumido me ventre tetendi,
omnia sumendo:  (lac holus ova butur.)
nunc instructa novis epulis mihi fercula dantur,
et permixta simul dulcius esca placet.
nam cum lacte mihi posuerunt inde buturum:
unde prius fuerat, huc revocatur adeps.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Agnes and her patron Radegund when he visited Poitiers. They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Venanti Fortunati Opera Poetica</em>, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin: Weidmann, 1881), 267, Librum XI, xxii and xxiia.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567