---
letter_id: "24677"
title: "A letter from Fortunatus (after 567)"
ititle: "a letter from fortunatus (after 567)"
ltr_date: "after 567"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-03-27"
url: "/letter/976.html"
senders:
  - id: 21338
    name: Fortunatus
    iname: fortunatus
    type: people
    url: /people/21338.html
receivers:
  - id: 90
    name: Agnes, abbess of the Holy Cross
    iname: agnes, abbess of the holy cross
    type: woman
    url: /woman/90.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>[Again]
Agnes, sweeter to me in merits than a river of nectar,
whom in the presence of God, I cherish in my mind,
see how things are changed with swift rotation,
while our times fly as if with wings.
With uncertain events, we do not know the details and the hours;
tomorrow who can be sure that there is a man or not?
Today deep snow bent down the top of the tree
and winter curves the hard limbs of the branches:
tomorrow perhaps the day will have shone with a pure rising,
the frost lie, liquid in the warming sun.              (10)
So also the mind of men in doubt about the end of salvation
does not know how long life can go on.
But since all things run in a varied course,
wise one, love with your heart [him] whom you would never lose:
let Christ be your honor, your hope, your lover.
Fix the wealth of salvation always on him alone;
at all times turn this in your innards:
so your chaste limbs keep faith with their spouse.
If sleep steals on you, keeping Christ in your breast
you bear the arms of light in the night:             (20)
cherishing him in your mind you are protected by the best wall
and if a thief rages, peace covers your heart.
Pour your whole self willingly into his embrace:
whoever has him fears no attacks.
Act so that when the judge of the world comes to the bridal chamber,
you gleam immaculate with pure innards;
then the sisters Thecla, Susanna, with happy chorus,
will receive you as you come with a shining lamp.
These mandates now, I leave while I go back briefly:
you also, while you read, remember me.     (30)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>[Item aliud]
Flumine nectareo meritis mihi dulcior Agnes,
quam praesente deo pectore, mente colo,
aspice quam celeri mutantur cuncta rotatu,
dum veluti pinnis tempora nostra volant.
casibus incertis scriptulos nescimus et horas;
cras sit homo an non sit quis dabit inde fidem?
arboris oppressit hodie nix alta cacumen
duraque ramorum brachia curvat hiems:
crastina forte dies puro si fulserit ortu,
si qua pruina iacet, sole calente liquet.         (10)
sic quoque mens hominum dubio de fine salutis
ignorat quantum vivere vita queat.
sed quoniam vario transcurrunt omnia lapsu,
quem numquam perdas dilige corde sagax:
sit tibi Christus honor, Christus spes, Christus amator.
in solo semper fige salutis opem;
temporibus cunctis hunc per tua viscera volve:
sic sponso servent membra pudica fidem.
si sopor obripiat, retinendo in pectore Christum
tempore sub noctis luminis arma geris:        (20)
illum mente colens muro tutaris opimo
et si latro furit, pax tua corda tegit.
huius in amplexu te totam effunde licenter;
illum quisquis habet crimina nulla timet.
hoc age ut, ad thalamus cum venerit arbiter orbis,
visceribus puris inmaculata mices;
lampade fulgenti tunc te veniente sorores
excipiant laeto Thecla, Susanna choro.
haec modo dum redeo breviter mandata relinquo:
tu quoque, dum religis, me memorare velis.  (30)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Bishop Venantius Fortunatus met Agnes and her patron Radegund when he visited Poitiers. They became good friends and exchanged epistolary poems and small gifts until the women died.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2>Venantii Fortunati, Opera Poetica, ed. Fridericus Leo (Berlin:  Weidmann, 1881), 287-88, Appendix, xxiii.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>after 567