---
letter_id: "24681"
title: "A letter from Gregory VII (1073, April 28)"
ititle: "a letter from gregory vii (1073, april 28)"
ltr_date: "1073, April 28"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-06-25"
url: "/letter/980.html"
senders:
  - id: 21366
    name: Gregory VII
    iname: gregory vii
    type: people
    url: /people/21366.html
receivers:
  - id: 20
    name: Beatrice of Lorraine, duke of Tuscany
    iname: beatrice of lorraine, duke of tuscany
    type: woman
    url: /woman/20.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Gregory, Roman pontiff-elect, to Duke Beatrice; Hugo, abbot of Cluny; Manasses, archbishop of Rheims; Swen, king of Denmark; and the abbot of Marseilles.

Gregory, Roman pontiff-elect to Wibert, archbishop of Ravenna, greeting in Christ Jesus.
We doubt not that rumor has outrun our letter and has informed you and many others of the death of our lord Pope Alexander. His death was a great blow to me, and all my inward parts were shaken to their depths. For at first the Roman populace, contrary to their custom, placed the control of affairs in our hands so quietly that it was evidently done by the special providence of God.
Wherefore, having taken advice, we came to this decision: that after a three days' fast and after the public funeral services and the prayers of many persons, accompanied by works of charity, we would declare by God's help what should seem best to be done about the choice of a Roman pontiff. But then, suddenly, while our late master the pope was being borne to his burial in the church of Our Savior, a great tumult and shouting of the people arose and they rushed upon me like madmen, leaving me neither time nor opportunity to speak or to take counsel, and dragged me by force to the place of apostolic rule, to which I am far from being equal. So that I may say with the prophet: " I am come into deep waters where the floods overflow me. I am weary with my crying; my throat is dried.'' And again: '' Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed me.'' But now I am wearied with many and heavy cares, so that I cannot well dictate, and so I pass over the story of my misfortunes. 
I beg you, by Almighty God, to show me especially in this crisis the charity which you have promised to the Church of Rome and also, as you must remember, to me in particular, as circumstances and the nature of things may demand — to show this now to me, not indeed for any merit of mine, but for love of the Apostles. I beg you also to exhort your suffragans and the sons of your church to pray God on my behalf that he may give me strength to bear this burden imposed upon me against my will and with great reluctance on my part; that he may reach forth his hand and, though he has willed that I should not rest in a haven of safety, he may at least not desert me now that I am cast into such great peril. For, as I love you with genuine affection, I demand of you the same and whatever good offices belong with it.
You can have no doubt whatever that we should desire to bind together the Church of Rome and that over which you under God's will preside, by every bond of affection, so far as our mutual honor permits, so that perfect peace and harmony may unite our hearts forever. As, therefore, we have urged upon your good judgment, know that it is our will and pleasure that by frequent interchange of messengers we may enjoy mutual comfort and consolation.
Rome, 6th kalends of May, indiction 11.

These notices are all alike, except that toward the end the several letters differ from each other to conform with the differences of place and person.

Rome, 4th kalends of May, indiction 11.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Gregorius in Romanum pontificem electus Beatrici duci, Ugoni abbati Cluniacensi, Manassae archiepiscopo Remensi, Suein regi Danorum, abbati Massiliensi.

Gregorius in Romanum pontificem electus Guiberto Ravvennati archiepiscopo salutem in Christo Iesu.
Non dubitamus famam litteras nostras antevolasse et tam vobis quam multis aliis domini nostri Alexandri pape obitum nuntiasse.  Quod autem mihi valde gemendum est, mors eius super me cecidit et omnia viscera mea concutiens penitus conturbavit.  Nam in morte eius primo quidem Romanus populus contra morem ita quievit et in manu nostra consilii frena dimisit, ut evidenter appareret ex Dei misericordia hoc provenisse.  Unde accepto consilio hoc statuimus, ut post triduanum ieiunium, post letanias et multorum orationem elemosinis conditam divino fulti auxilio statueremus, quod de electione Romani pontificis videretur melius.  Sed subito, cum predictus dominus noster papa in ecclesia Salvatoris sepulture traderetur, ortus est magnus tumultus populi et fremitus et in me quasi vesani insurrexerunt, nil dicendi, nil consulendi facultatis aut spatii relinquentes violentis manibus me in locum apostolici regiminis, cui longe impar sum, rapuerunt.  Ita recte ego cum propheta possum dicere:  ‘Veni in altitudinem maris et tempestas demersit me; laboravi clamans, rauce facte sunt fauces mee; denique:  ‘Timor et tremor venerunt super me et contexerunt me tenebre’.  Sed quia multis et magnis curis fatigatus satis dictare nequeo, miserias meas enumerare supersedeo.  Rogo itaque vos per omnipotentem Deum, ut caritatem, quam erga Romanam ecclesiam maxime hoc tempore et, ut meminisse debetis, erga me specialiter vos gerere promisistis, quoniam quidem tempus et rerum qualitas eius probari postulat, nunc quidem in me, etsi non meis meritis, saltim amore apostolorum, ostendere curetis et suffraganeos ac filios ecclesie vestre ad exorandum Deum pro me invitetis ac commoneatis, quatenus ad ferendum onus, quod mihi invito et valde reluctanti impositum est, vires tribuat, manum porrigat, ut, si me tutum in portu stare noluit, saltim in tam alta pericula proiectum non relinquat.  Ego enim sicut in caritate non ficta vos diligo, ita eandem et quecunque eius officia sunt a vobis indubitanter exigo.  Neque vero dilectioni vestre dubitandum est, quin Romanam ecclesiam et eam, cui Deo auctore presidetis, ea concordia et, quantum cum communi utriusque honore poterimus, omnimoda caritate copulare desideremus, ut in nostris etiam animis semper coniuncta pax et plena dilectio connectatur.  Sicut igitur prudentiam vestram hortati sumus, ita etiam per elementa nostra nos velle ac desiderare cognoscite, videlicet ut frequenter inter nos legatis discurrentibus colletari et mutua consolatione gaudere possimus.  Data Rome VI Kalendas Maii, Indictione XI.

In ceteris quidem a paribus, sed circa finem singulis epistolis iuxta locorum et personarum competentiam discrepantibus.

Date Rome 4 Kalenda Maii, indictione ll.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>A note following letter 1.3 to Wibert of Ravenna identifies the others to whom Gregory sent essentially the same letter announcing his election.  I have incorporated the letter to Wibert which is the one cited in the official Register, along with the note that the letters differ only to conform to differences of place and person.<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Register Gregors VII, MGH, EpSel</em>, ed. Erich Caspar, ep.1.3 and 1.4; translation from <em>The Correspondence of Pope Gregory VII</em>, Selected Letters from the Registrum, trans. Ephraim Emerton, p.2-4; reprinted with permission of the publisher.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1073, April 28