---
letter_id: "24682"
title: "A letter from Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury (1094/1095)"
ititle: "a letter from anselm, archbishop of canterbury (1094/1095)"
ltr_date: "1094/1095"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-09"
url: "/letter/981.html"
senders:
  - id: 21249
    name: Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury
    iname: anselm, archbishop of canterbury
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 91
    name: Nun M., daughter of Richard
    iname: nun m., daughter of richard
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Anselm, called archbishop to his dearest daughter M., daughter of Richard, wishing that she may always cling in her heart to her spouse Christ, and obey him in her deeds.
It is delightful for me, most delightful daughter, to write with paternal affection something particularly for your holy sweetness because, although I love you in the midst of your other holy sisters as a handmaid and spouse of my Lord, yet because of my friendship with your parents I know that I owe you something more.
You have read, my dearest friend, that many are called but few are chosen [Matth.22:14].  Therefore, my daughter, hold on to this brief admonition from your father in God who loves you truly, so that you never feel confident that you are certainly among the number of the chosen unless you certainly seem to have progressed to such a degree of holiness that you are truly among the number of the few.  And when you imagine yourself to be among the number of the few, you should not yet feel secure, since you still do not know whether you are among those few who have been chosen.  For he who says that few are chosen does not say how few they are.  Therefore you should never feel secure until you see yourself among those few about whom there is no doubt, like St. Agnes and St. Scholastica and the other holy men and women whom we know to be already rejoicing with Christ in heaven.  Consequently, most delightful daughter, let no progress in virtue satisfy your heart, but let it continually strive to progress to even greater things.  For nobody can avoid falling back except one who always strains towards progress.
May the almighty Lord so fill you with his grace that he lifts you up to the firmest peak of virtue and leads you into the bridal chamber of his glory.  Pray for me, your loving friend, most beloved daughter, that God may guide and strengthen me.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Anselmus, vocatus archiepiscopus:  filiae suae carissimae M., filiae Ricardi, sponso suo Christo corde semper adhaerere et operibus oboedire.
Dulce mihi est, filia dulcissima, aliquid specialiter sanctae dulcedini tuae paterno affectu scribere, quia, quamvis te inter alias sanctas sorores tuas ut ancillam et sponsam domini mei diligam, cognosco tamen quod aliquid tibi propter amicitiam parentum tuorum plus debeam.
Legisti, carissima, quia multi sunt vocati, pauci vero electi.  Tene igitur hanc parvam admonitionem patris tui in deo te vere diligentis, filia, ut numquam confidas te certissime esse in numero electorum, nisi certissime videris ad tantam sanctitatem profecisse, ut vere sis in numero paucorum; et cum te videris in numero paucorum, nondum secura sis, quia adhuc nescis si de illis paucis qui electi sunt sis.  Qui enim dicit quia pauci sunt electi, non dicit quam pauci sint.  Numquam ergo secura sis, donec te videas de illis paucis, de quibus nulla est dubitatio, qualis fuit beata Agnes vel Scholastica et alii sancti viri et mulieres, quos iam in caelo cum Christo gaudere cognoscimus.  Nullus igitur, filia dulcissima, virtutum profectus cordi tuo sufficiat, quin semper ad maiora proficere studeat.  Nullus enim potest vitare defectum, nisi qui se semper extendit ad profectum.
Omnipotens dominus sic te sua gratia repleat, ut ad firmissimum culmen virtutum te provehat et in thalamum suae gloriae introducat.  Ora pro me, dilectore tuo, filia dilectissima, ut me deus dirigat et consoletur.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>F.S. Schmitt, <em>S. Anselmi Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Opera Omnia</em> (Edinburgh: Thomas Nelson, 1938-61, reprinted Stuttgart: Frommann, 1984), ep.184. The translation is from Walter Froehlich, <em>The Letters of Saint Anselm of Canterbury</em> (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1990-1994). Cistercian Publications Inc. Editorial Offices, Institute of Cistercian Studies, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008. All rights are reserved; downloading and copying for any purpose other than private research is prohibited.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>1094/1095