---
letter_id: "24692"
title: "A letter from Walafrid Strabo ()"
ititle: "a letter from walafrid strabo ()"
ltr_date: "None"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2014-10-01"
url: "/letter/991.html"
senders:
  - id: 21611
    name: Walafrid Strabo
    iname: walafrid strabo
    type: people
    url: /people/21611.html
receivers:
  - id: 92
    name: Judith of Bavaria, Empress
    iname: judith of bavaria, empress
    type: woman
    url: /woman/21725.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Who alone protects all secrets of things,
offers rewards to minds devoted to the faith,
I shall confess his act with thought and will,
so that I who to be most faithful to you with humble heart
long ago declared, finally for what reason I do not know,
I am drawn to your service and that of your blessed progeny,
how to your successes as well as those of this kingdom
the kind piety of god granted to rise great.
May the merciful power of god always protect,
exalt, strangthen, guide, arm and adorn you and yours.
Humble Strabus sends these small presents to the empress,
transmitted pledges of many as deposit to the lord.
Lover of peace,     Friend of light   Who all good things
Protect in mind     Kind one accept   These my writings.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Omnia qui solus rerum secreta tuetur,
Praemia qui fidei devotis mentibus offert,
Illius arbitrio factum nutuque fatebor,
Ut, qui corde humili vobis fidissimus esse
Iam pridem statui, tandem quo nescio casu,
Servitio attraherer vestro prolisque beatae,
Quam vestris regnique simul profectibus huius
Alma dei pietas concessit surgere magni.
Vos vestrosque dei semper miserata potestas
Protegat, exaltet, firmet, regat, armet, adornet.
Augustae haec humilis mittit munuscula Strabus
Pignora multorum domino transmissa sequestro.
Pacis amatrix,     Lucis amica,       Quae bona cuncta
Mente tueris,      Haec mea clemens   Percipe scripta.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>The poem is a declaration of support for the empress, which apparently accompanied small gifts, perhaps other poems.
Strabo wrote a panegyric to Judith's husband and his court which included complimentary pictures of the empress (In honorem Hludovici).
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Walhfridi Strabi Carmina,</em> MGH <em>Poetarum Latinorum Medii Aevi,</em> v.2, ed. Ernestus Duemmler (Munich: MGH, 1884, repr.1978), 378-79.</p>