---
letter_id: "24696"
title: "A letter from Hrabanus Maurus (841-51)"
ititle: "a letter from hrabanus maurus (841-51)"
ltr_date: "841-51"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-04-07"
url: "/letter/995.html"
senders:
  - id: 21405
    name: Hrabanus Maurus
    iname: hrabanus maurus
    type: people
    url: /people/21405.html
receivers:
  - id: 94
    name: Ermengard of Tours
    iname: ermengard of tours
    type: woman
    url: /woman/94.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>Glorious queen, holding the scepter, I beg that you accept
this work undertaken for you, great one
do not scorn the song sent, but receive it with happy heart
in which you recognize the right to serve you of the minister
never unfaithful, but more devoted with art.
For the grace of Christ has filled you with nourishing gifts
and made you pleasing to all, such that you
holding kingdoms may remain humble, and preserve your many
gifts, if you should continue as you have begun.
Accept, I ask, this noble Judith as model for all,                 10
And imitate her rightly with mind and hand.
Having accepted her, may she make you happy with Christ in heaven,
so the enemy can never henceforth say “puppup,”
but lasting glory remain with you in the citadel of heaven.
For I pray one thing, that always in great struggle
you strive to serve Christ and give aid to vows:
then may the savior keep you through all time,
and the pious judge set you before his tribunal,
bestowing on you heavenly things with a nod for the great merits,
increased with all goods so you may be happy through time.   20
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Inclita sceptra tenens, commissum deprecor istud,
Regina, accipias opus et tibi, maxima, carmen
Missum non spernas, laeto sed suscipe corde
In quo cognoscis tibi ius servire ministri
Nequaquam infidi, devoti sed magis arte.
Gratia nam Christi donis te impleverat almis
Ac gratam cunctis effecit, taliter ut tu
Regna tenens humilis maneas, et plurima servat
Dona tibi, in cepto si tu permanseris actu.
Accipe, quaeso, Iudith exemplar nobile cunctis,     10
Mente manuque simul atque hanc imitabere rite.
Acceptam haec Christo faciet te et in aethere laetam,
Ut numquam valeat hostis dehinc dicere puppup,
Gloria sed perpes maneat tibi in aetheris arce.
Unum namque precor, magno in certamine semper
Servire studeas Christo et succurrere votis:
Tunc te salvator servat per tempora cuncta,
Atque suum statuet iudex pius ante tribunal,
Magnis pro meritis tribuens caelestia nutu,
Omnibus aucta bonis ut sis per saecula laeta.       20
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2><p>Rabanus sent his commentary on Judith, which he had previously dedicated to empress Judith, to Ermengard with a poem dedicating it to her. The first letter of each line spells Irmingardam Augustam; the order is therefore more distorted than usual, so the translation is not exactly line by line.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH, <em>Poetarum Latinorum Medii Aevi</em>, v.2, p.167.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>841-51