---
letter_id: "24699"
title: "A letter from Hrabanus Maurus (841-51)"
ititle: "a letter from hrabanus maurus (841-51)"
ltr_date: "841-51"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2021-11-30"
url: "/letter/998.html"
senders:
  - id: 21405
    name: Hrabanus Maurus
    iname: hrabanus maurus
    type: people
receivers:
  - id: 94
    name: Ermengard of Tours
    iname: ermengard of tours
    type: woman
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>To the distinguished and most worhty of all honor lady, empress Ermengard, Rhabanus the most base of the servants of God wishes salvation in Christ.
Remembering your mercy and kindness, with which you received unworthy me in a former time in the town of Mainz, when you were present there with lord Lothar the emperor, I have always been devoted since then and prayed the Lord with constant prayers that what I heard before about you of good report and afterwards I experienced in your presence, he would deign to multiply in you with the indescribable gift of his grace and lead you to the reward of eternal beatitude.  I believe in my God that that mind which he illumines with the reward of his spirit through benevolence and true charity, he never permits to be devoid of the happiness of eternal beatitude, since good will is the beginning and increase of true beatitude.  Perfection is however the gift of God alone.
I nonetheless, since I can add nothing to your wealth and virtues, at least could elaborate from the generosity of divine piety meditating and discoursing on holy scriptures, I determined to participate with you if you hold it worthy.  Therefore I sent to your dignity the first exposition of the book of Esther, whose prudence and constancy of mind and victory over enemies offers the most noble example to any of the faithful, that observing divine law and having firm hope in the goodness of God, they may be sure of freeing themselves from all their enemies.  If, then, this first is received with favor by your excellence, after that I intend to contribute more with similar zeal in your service.
May divine majesty deign to preserve your life unharmed and strong in prosperity.
O powerful queen, accept the model I offer of a powerful
queen very pleasing to God,
who rightly carried out the salvation of her own people,
behold the benign goods of her life.
Saving her kindred, she destroyed the enemy with prayers
and hoping in God, exulting she conquered all.
So you also always have care for the subject
people, raising them with mouth, mind, and hand.
Then the lofty throne will offer you happy times,
a peaceful empire, and all just and good things.         10
And after this life you will ascend to the citadel of light,
there where you will hold the blessed kingdoms of heaven.
The delights of the world perish, everything beautiful perishes,
kingdoms of the world fall, the world itself falls,
and rank and scepter, power and the glory of the world
passes and the very day, and black night falls in the sky.
Leaves drop, fruits dry up in the woods,
weak seeds fall from the drooping flower.
All the beautiful things of earth are put to flight through the world,
only the love of Christ always remains everywhere.     20
And whatever good things the guest of little time does,
remain untouched above with the piety of God.
Wherefore I admonish, whatever your right hand can,
strenuously do much of outstanding work.
Since after this life there is no power/capacity to work,
but everyone reaps the fruit of one's work,
now the time is apt and acceptable to Christ
 to serve God, whom love serves well.
To this you, with mind, hand (1). . . and benign speech,
give service, so you will please the Lord.           30
Hidden rewards with gifts perpetual in themeselves
are reserved for you and glory with God.
To which may the majesty of the thunderer on high lead you,
that you may always live happy in the citadel of heaven.
For you, queen, I suffering lying on my pallet,
have composed these verses, you be well without end.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>Domine praeclare et omni honore dignissime Ermengarde auguste Rhabanus vilissimus servorum Dei in Christo optat salutem.
Memor clementie vestre et mansuetudinis, qua me preterito tempore in Mogontiaco oppido indignum suscepistis, quando ibi apud dominum Hlotharium imperatorem presentialiter
affluistis, semper deinceps devotus fui et Dominum assiduis precibus deprecabar, ut hoc, quod antea de vobis bonae famae audivi et postea praesens expertus sum, inenarrabili gratiae suae dono vobis multiplicare atque ad praemium aeternae beatitudinis perducere dignetur.  Credo in Deo meo, quod illam mentem, quam sui spiritus munere per benivolentiam et veram caritatem illustrat, numquam ab aeternae beatitudinis felicitate vacuam fieri permittat, quia bona voluntas verae beatitudinis inicium et incrementum extat.  Perfectio autem eius solius Dei donum est.
Ego autem, quia nichil vestrae opulentiae et virtutibus addere possum, saltem hoc quod ex largitate divinae pietatis in sacris scripturis meditando et disserendo elaborare potui, vobiscum, si dignum ducitis, participare decerno.  Idcirco primum vestrae dignitati expositionem libri Hester reginae transmisi, cuius prudentia et constantia mentis victoriaque de hostibus nobilissimum quibusque fidelibus praebet exemplum, ut divinam legem servantes et spem firmam in Dei bonitate habentes confidant se de universis inimicis liberandos.  Si autem hec benigne a vestra excellentia primum suscepta fuerint, deinceps plura in obsequium vestrum simili studio conferre dispono.
Vitam vestram illaesam et prosperitate pollentem maiestas divina conservare dignetur.
        O regina potens, exemplar posco potentis
        Accipe regine valde Deo placite,
        Que gentis propriae praefecit rite salutem
        Ecce sue vite valde benigna bona.
        Salvans cognatos precibus contrivit et hostes,
        In Domino sperans cuncta subegit ovans.
        Sic quoque subiecte curam tu semper habeto
        Plebis, hanc relevans oreque, mente, manu.
        Tunc tibi celsithronus prestabit tempora leta,
        Pacatum imperium, cunctaque iusta, bona.    10
        Et post hanc vitam conscendes lucis ad arcem,
        Illic quo teneas regna beata poli.
        Delicie mundi pereunt, perit omneque pulchrum,
        Regna ruunt mundi, mundus et ipse ruit,
        Et decus et sceptrum, virtus et gloria mundi,
        Transit et ipsa dies, nox ruit atra polo.
        Folia decidunt, arescunt arbuta silvis,
        Flacida deciso gramina flore cadunt.
        Omnia vertuntur mundi speciosa per orbem,
        Solus amor Christi semper ubique manet.      20
        Et quecumque facit parvi bona temporis hospes,
        Salva manent sursum cum pietate Dei.
        Quapropter moneo quicquid tua dextera possit,
        Egregii nimium strenue fac operis.
        Post quia hanc vitam iam operandi est nulla potestas,
        Sed fructus operis quisque metet proprii,
        Tempus nunc aptum est atque acceptabile Christo
        Inservire Deo, cui bene servit amor.
        Huic tu mente, manu (1) . . . et sermone benigno
        Obsequium presta, sicque places Domino.      30
        Premia perpetuis in se recondita donis
        Hinc tibi servantur gloria cumque Deo.
        Quo te perducat maiestas celsitonantis,
        Ut vivas felix semper in arce poli.
        Hos tibi decumbens eger, regina, grabatto
        Composui versus, tu sine fine vale.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Hrabanus rededicates his commentary on Esther to the empress, which he had previously dedicated to empress Judith, her step-mother-in-law.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1) The editor notes that a word is missing at this point in the manuscript.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p>MGH <em>Ep.Kar.Aevi</em> 3, <em>Hrabani Mauri Epistolae,</em> 46, p.500-01</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>841-51