---
letter_id: "24700"
title: "A letter from Jerome (374-76)"
ititle: "a letter from jerome (374-76)"
ltr_date: "374-76"
draft: false
type: "letter"
created: "2014-03-04"
modified: "2018-11-16"
url: "/letter/999.html"
senders:
  - id: 21430
    name: Jerome
    iname: jerome
    type: people
    url: /people/21430.html
receivers:
  - id: 95
    name: Virgins of Haemon
    iname: virgins of haemon
    type: woman
    url: /woman/95.html
---
<h2> Translated letter:</h2>The poor quality of this sheet is an indication of my remote location; for this reason, I have fit a great amount of content into a small space; also because I wanted to speak with you at length while the narrowness of the sheet was compelling me to be brief.  Thus, poverty has been conquered by ability.  The letters are indeed small, but the conversation long.  And still, in this moment of necessity, observe my esteem for you, since want of writing material was not able to keep me from writing.  But please pardon my grief; for I speak as one offended, I speak with tears and with anger: you do not even offer a single pen-stroke for the one who so often works on your behalf.  I know it is because there is no communion for light with darkness: there is no fellowship among the handmaidens of the lord, with a sinner.  But nevertheless, even a harlot washed the lord’s feet with her tears, and dogs eat from the crumbs of their masters.  And the Savior himself did not come to summon the just, but the sinners.  For the healthy do not need a doctor.  And he desires a sinner’s repentance more than his death.  And he brings the straying little sheep back on his own shoulders.  And the happy father receives his prodigal son on his return home.  Indeed, the Apostle says: Do not judge before the time.  For who are you to judge the slave of another?  He stands to his own master, or he falls.  And the one who stands, let him take care lest he fall.  And, bear your burdens in turn.  In one way, dearest sisters, the disdain of man judges, in another, Christ judges.  The opinion of his tribunal is not the same as the opinion of the gossipers’ corner.  Many paths seem just to men which are found to be depraved later on.  And treasure is often hidden in brick-like vessels.  Bitter tears restored Peter into his place who denied the lord three times.  He, who is forgiven more, loves more.  There is silence concerning the entire flock; still, on account of the health of one sickly sheep, the angels rejoice in heaven.  But if this seems unworthy to anyone, let him hear from the lord: Friend, if I am good, why is your eye wicked?(1)
<h2 class="mt-4"> Original letter:</h2>xi Ad virgines Haemonenses
Chartae exiguitas indicium solitudinis est; et idcirco longum sermonem brevi spatio coartavi, quia et vobiscum volebam prolixius loqui et angustia scedulae cogebat tacere.  nunc igitur ingenio est victa pauperies. minutae quidem litterae, sed confabulatio longa est.  et tamen in hoc necessitatis articulo animadvertite caritatem, cum me nec penuria scriptionis valuit prohibere, ne scriberem.  vos autem ignoscite, obsecro, dolenti; dico enim laesus, dico lacrimans et irascens:  ne unum quidem apicem totiens vobis tribuenti officium praestitistis.  scio quia nulla communio luci et tenebris est, nulla cum ancillis dei et peccatoribus sociatio; attamen et meretrix domino pedes lacrimis lavit et de dominorum micis canes edunt et ipse salvator non venit iustos vocare, sed peccatores.  non enim egent sani medico et mavult paenitentiam peccatoris quam mortem et errantem oviculam suis umeris refert et prodigum filium revertentem excepit laetus pater.  quin potius apostolus ait:  nolite iudicare ante tempus.  tu enim quis es, qui alienum servum iudices?  suo domino stat aut cadit, et:  qui stat, videat ne cadat, et:  invicem onera vestra portate.  aliter, sorores carissimae, hominum livor, aliter Christus iudicat.  non eadem sententia est tribunalis eius et anguli susorronum.  multae hominibus viae videntur iustae et postea repperientur pravae, et in testaceis vasculis thesaurus saepe reconditur.  Petrum ter negantem amarae in locum suum restituere lacrimae.  cui plus dimittitur, plus amat.  de toto grege siletur et ob unius morbidi pecudis salutem angeli laetantur in caelo.  quod si cui videtur indignum, a domino audiat:  amice, si ego bonus, quare oculus tuus nequam est?
<h2 class="mt-4"> Historical context:</h2>Jerome was impressed by this early community of religious women and formed a spiritual friendship with them, which was disrupted by attacks on him that led him to leave the area in some disgrace.  The letter was written a few years later from Syria, asking their forgiveness and good will.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Scholarly notes:</h2>(1)  This translation was provided by Amy Oh.
<h2 class="mt-4"> Printed source:</h2><p><em>Sancti Eusebii Hieronymi Epistulae</em>, 3 v. ed. Isidorus Hilberg (CSEL, Vienna: Tempsky, 1910-18, repr. NY: Johnson, 1970) , ep.11.</p><h2 class="mt-4"> Date:</h2>374-76