---
woman_id: "21799"
title: "Guillelma of Montpellier"
ititle: "guillelma of montpellier"
draft: false
type: "woman"
birthdate: "early 12th century"
deathdate: "late 12th century"
social_title: "Viscountess of Nimes"
created: "2013-12-19"
modified: "2021-06-25"
url: "/woman/169.html"
sent:
  - url: letter/25768.html
    name: A letter to Bernard Laimund (1171, May)
    iname: a letter to bernard laimund (1171, may)
  - url: letter/1456.html
    name: A letter to Durand Alfred of Bedillan (1166, October)
    iname: a letter to durand alfred of bedillan (1166, october)
  - url: letter/25766.html
    name: A letter to Durant of Coirano (1171, April)
    iname: a letter to durant of coirano (1171, april)
  - url: letter/25757.html
    name: A letter to Maiafred and Maria (1152)
    iname: a letter to maiafred and maria (1152)
  - url: letter/25774.html
    name: A letter to Peter of Coirano (1171)
    iname: a letter to peter of coirano (1171)
  - url: letter/1455.html
    name: A letter to Peter Raymond of Anagia (1166, May)
    iname: a letter to peter raymond of anagia (1166, may)
  - url: letter/25764.html
    name: A letter to Peter Raynald (1170)
    iname: a letter to peter raynald (1170)
  - url: letter/25762.html
    name: A letter to Ponsia Andrea (1170)
    iname: a letter to ponsia andrea (1170)
  - url: letter/1458.html
    name: A letter to Public (1168)
    iname: a letter to public (1168)
  - url: letter/25770.html
    name: A letter to Stephen Bedoc (1171)
    iname: a letter to stephen bedoc (1171)
  - url: letter/25755.html
    name: A letter to Stephen John (1152)
    iname: a letter to stephen john (1152)
  - url: letter/25772.html
    name: A letter to Stephen Sperandeo (1171)
    iname: a letter to stephen sperandeo (1171)
  - url: letter/25776.html
    name: A letter to William Baltugat (1172)
    iname: a letter to william baltugat (1172)
  - url: letter/25759.html
    name: A letter to William Gil of Marcelaco (1167)
    iname: a letter to william gil of marcelaco (1167)
  - url: letter/1454.html
    name: A letter to William of Gallina (1166, January)
    iname: a letter to william of gallina (1166, january)
  - url: letter/1452.html
    name: A letter to William of Radico (1146)
    iname: a letter to william of radico (1146)
received:
  - url: letter/1451.html
    name: A letter from Bernard Ato V (after 1129)
    iname: a letter from bernard ato v (after 1129)
  - url: letter/1453.html
    name: A letter from Eleazar of Sauve (c.1159)
    iname: a letter from eleazar of sauve (c.1159)
  - url: letter/1457.html
    name: A letter from Pons of Vezenobre (1166)
    iname: a letter from pons of vezenobre (1166)
---
<h2 class="mt-4">Overview</h2><dt>Title social-status</dt><dd>Viscountess of Nimes</dd><dt>Date of Birth</dt><dd>early 12th century</dd><dt>Date of Death</dt><dd>late 12th century</dd><h2 class="mt-4">Biography</h2><p>(See also Genealogical Table(s): <a href="/content/genealogy-bernard#n169">6</a>.)<br>Guillelma is the eldest daughter of Guillaume VI of Montpellier and Sybilla, a Catalan noblewoman (A.R. Lewis, "The Guillems of Montpellier: A Sociological Appraisal", <em>Viator,</em> 2 (1971): 161.) She apparently married Bernard Ato V before the end of 1146, when her father, leaving on crusade, made a will that included an order to his son and successor to pay the rest of her dowry. He had in an earlier will named her as his heir after his three sons and their legal issue: “If these three sons of mine, William the elder and William the younger and Bernard die without heirs from legal wives or their heirs die without heirs from legal marriage, I order that all their inheritance revert to my daughter Guillelma or her legal heir. In the same manner if my daughter Guillelma should die without heir from legal husband or her heirs die without heir from legal marriage, the whole abovewritten fief should revert to my daughter Ermengarde or to her legal heir” (Devic and Vaissette, 5.891: si isti tres filii mei Guillelmus major &amp; Guillelmus minor &amp; Bernardus moriant sine haeredibus de legalibus uxoribus vel haeredes eorum moriant sine haeredibus de legali conjugio, tota eorum haereditas jubeo ut ad Guillelmam filiam meam revertat vel ad haeredem ejus legalem. Eodem modo si Guillelma filia mea moriat sine haerede de legali marito vel haeres ejus moriat sine haerede de legali conjugio, totus honor praescriptus revertat ad Ermengardem filiam meam vel ad haeredem ejus legalem). Some years later in 1172, her brother, Guillaume VII, mentions her and her son, Bernard Ato VI, in his will, putting them in the succession after his brother and his daughters (see <em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes</em>, 1.101a, #237). Bernard Ato V was the third son of Bernard Ato IV, viscount of Albi, Béziers, Agde and Nîmes, who inherited Nimes and later the title of Agde. He died c.1159, leaving Guillelma pregnant with Bernard Ato VI, for whom she was regent until his majority. There were problems but they were resolved (see Devic and Vaisette, HGL, 3.839-40): an oath taken in June 1163 by knights of Arenes, the principal town of Nimes, promised peace with Raymond and no war with their viscount before he reached 14; Pons de Vezenobre revolted with a number of other knights against the young Bernard and his mother, but they were quickly brought round; a dispute between knights and bourgeois of Nimes ended with an accord in 1166; Eleazar de Sauve and his brother Rostaing renewed their oaths of fidelity c.1168 for castle of Bernis. Guillelma participated in a number of charters with her husband before he died, after which she issued charters for herself and her son until his majority, then in 1175 he issued one “with the advice and consent of his mother” (Layettes, 1.109, #262). Guillelma affirmed acts of her husband in 1177: “Et ego Guillelma Nemausensis vicecomitissa, mater predicti B. Atonis, hec omnia predicta laudo &amp; concedo” (Devic &amp;Vaisette, 8.326-8).</p><p>Most of the available legal documents which Guillelma issued or in which she participated, are chirographs (records of settlements which may or may not have been in dispute), published by Teulet in the <em>Layettes du Tresor des Chartes</em>. and translated below. They are in Latin but draw on local Provencal/Occitan terms. <br><em>Layettes,</em> 1.64 #101: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet, which makes known that in 1149th year of Lord’s incarnation, 12 kalends of June [May 21], in the reign of king Louis who was in Jerusalem, Aldebert, bishop of Nimes, Bernard Ato V, viscount of Nimes, and his wife Guilelma, viscountess, gave in fief to Bernhard Galfred and his sons Rostaing, Pons, Peter, and Stephen and their successors paying 12 pennies from the rent of public money of Nimes each year at the feast of St. Michael, also 15 sous of Melgueil to be paid at the same time for this donation, all the tables which before might stand beside the red door of St. Mary from the workshop of William Pons to the stand of Bernard Cervelle. This was made in the presence of Stephen Faber and Bernard Calvini and seven others. Peter of Rodez wrote it. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.64, #102: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet, in the 1149th year of the Lord’s incarnation, king Louis reigning, 10 kalends of December [November 22], of the exchange undertaken between Bernard Ato V, viscount of Nimes, and his wife Guillelma, on one side, and Serena daughter of William Tallant, wife of Pons of Vezenobre, on the other. By which exchange the aforesaid Bernard and Guillelma give whatever they have in the town of Vendargues, or in that territory, to said Serena, and grant by that law that she give dwelling to two knights serving her in any year. Said Serena, with the agreement of her husband Pons of Vezenobre and her brother Raymond Tallant, declares that she transfers whatever she had in the castle of Bernitio and its appurtenances to said Bernard Ato and Guillelma. This was done in the presence and under the witness of Peter Guirard, Bertrand of Montemirato, Bernard Arnald, and twenty others. Peter of Rodez wrote this, at the command of both sides. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.64, #103: Chirograph, divided at the head by letters of the alphabet, by which it makes known, in the 1149th years of the incarnation of the Lord, king Louis reigning, 5 kalends of December [November 27], that Bernard Ato V, viscount of Nimes, and Guillelma his wife, handed over two manses in the town of Colonzes, to Pons of Cabrieres (?Cerveria), his sons Hugo and Pons, and their successors, as a respected fief, and with the title of exchange received from them whatever Pons, William of Cabrieres, or others for him, held in the county of Nimes. This was done in the presence and under the witness of Peter Guirard, Peter Aldebert, William Fulco, Bernard of Vacheriis, Raymund Arvey, Bernard of Porta-vetera, William of Cortico, Francis, William of Chaumes, and nine others. Peter of Rodez wrote this, ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.66 #112: Chirograph , divided by letters of the alphabet in the side margin, in which it is affirmed that, in the 1150th year from the incarnation of the Lord, ides of January [January 8], in the reign of king Louis, Bernard Ato V, viscount of Nimes, and Guillelma, his wife, conferred two lands which they have at Aude [Oden?] on the highway, to Bernard Garner and his brother William, Pons Stephan, his brother Peter, and their children and successors, as fief, for bread and wine, paying one capon from the rent for each quarter of land, as well as 50 Egidian sous to be paid at this time which said viscount had, and 20 Melgueil sous, which said countess had. – This was done in the presence of Francis, Galfred Vituli, Bernard Rainon, and six others. Peter of Rodez wrote this. <br><em>Layettes,</em> 1.68 #119: Chirograph divided by letters of the alphabet in which it is affirmed that, in the 1150th year from the incarnation of the Lord, in the reign of king Louis, Bernard Ato V, viscount of Nimes, and viscountess Guillelma, his wife, conferred three pieces of land in the tithing division of St. Caesarius, in the place that is called at the close of Selsa/Cella beside the highway of Montpelliers and the river of St. Caesarius, to Franulf and Benedict, and their children and successors in fief, for bread and wine, by the law that said Franulf and Benedict should give a quarter [cartum] for all the fruits of said land and pay one capon of annual rent from each quarter. Who, moreover, because of this donation conferred on said viscount 100 Egidian sous and to said countess 20 sous, to be paid at this time. – Witnesses to this are: Barban, Raymond Cantarelle, Bernard of Tillo, Bernard of Clarenciac, Peter Franulf. Peter of Rodez wrote this. <br><em>Layettes,</em> 1.91 #196: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet in the margin, which affirms that – in the 1166th year from the incarnation of the Lord, in the month of October – viscountess Guillelma of Nimes for herself and her son the viscount, gave over in perpetual fief to Durant Alfred of Bedillan and his brother Peter and their children and successors, a certain estate that is called Redontiel, in the tithing division of St. Saturnine of Calvitio, in a placed called Escata, by such compact namely that the tax from all the fruits which might come from said estate, wheat, wood, rabbits, is given to her and her successors each year, and she may have two capons of rent besides the 10 Melgueil sous she received for this donation. – “This was done in the presence of William of Ecclesia, Peter Petit, deacon of Anglata and four others. Peter of Rodez wrote this.” <br><em>Layettes,</em> 1.91-2, #198: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet, by which Guillelma viscountess of Nimes, for herself and her son the viscount, declares that she gives a certain tract of uncultivated land located at the fountain of Albarna to Durant of Cabannas and all his successors in perpetual fief. For which donation, said countess had 3 Melgueil sous from said Durant, which beside the tax from the workable land and from the trees which were planted there, he will also be held to pay a quarter, and 2 pennies paid from the rent for as many years. – “This was done in the 1166th year from the incarnation of the Lord. – Witnesses of this thing are: Stephen John, Stephen Bernard, and five others. Peter of Rodez wrote this.” <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.93, #203: Chirograph divided by letters of the alphabet by which – in the 1166th year from the incarnation of the Lord, kalends of February [January 31] – viscountess Guillelma of Nimes, for herself and her son the viscount, gives in fief to Bernard Deusde and his successors, to pay 2 Melgueil sous at this time, one silver coin of rent and whatever payments, that tract of uncultivated land that is in the tithing division of Corbieres, in a place which is called Podium-altum. – Witnesses of this thing are: Durant of Cabannis, Stephen John, with seven others. Peter of&nbsp;Rodez wrote this.” In the same membrane is contained another document dated the same year and date for half the honor, that was granted in fief to Peter Siguin, Bertrand Siguin and his successors. <br><em>Layettes,</em> 1.93 #204: Chirograph divided by letters of the alphabet, in which it affirms that – in the 1166th year of the incarnation of the Lord, in the month of January – Guillelma, countess of Nimes, for herself and her son the viscount, and Bremond of Vezenobre, bailiff of William of Montpellier, granted and conceded to William Galline and all his successors this honor, located in the boundary of Corbieres, which said William Galline received from his aunt, Benedicta and holds from the aforesaid viscount. For which grant said viscountess and bailiff had 8 Melgueil sous. – “This was done in the presence of Aldebert and Pons Galline, Raymund Celestis, Peter Samuel, Bernard Provincial, William Rainaldini. Peter of Rodez wrote this.” <br><em>Layettes,</em> 1.95, #211: Chirograph divided by letters of the alphabet which makes known that – in the 1167th year from the incarnation of the Lord – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes, for herself and her son, gave “water from the fountain of uncultivated land at Boilancis on the night of St. John, annually, always and perpetually” to William Gili of Marcelac and his children and successors, for purchase with the usual conditions. – “And I Bernard Ato approve and grant the same. Witness of this thing are: Bertrand Garcin, John Ulric, with four others. Peter the Small [Parvus] wrote this.” <br>Layettes, 1.96-97 #224: Charter indented and divided by letters of the alphabet, which states – in the year 1170 from the incarnation of the Lord, in the month of October – that Guillelma viscountess of Nimes and her son, viscount Bernard Ato VI, gave and handed over to Bernard Magister, his brother William of Ornezes, and their successors, a certain estate located in the tithing division of Calvicio, in a place which is called Oliveda Gazaldenca, as a fief, by means of a paid feudal right and certain payments. – The witnesses of this thing are: Peter Bedocius, Raymond of Calvicio, Stephen Galfred, and William Benedictus. Peter Petiti [the Small?] wrote it. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.97,#226: Chirograph divided by letters of the alphabet, which states that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1170, in the month of November – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes and her son, Bernard Ato VI, gave two pieces of slope [costa], situated in the tithing division of Calvicio, to William Catmando, his brothers and nephews, for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions. – Witnesses of this thing are: Bremond of Albasio, William Benedictus and six others. Peter Petiti wrote [this] ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.98, #228: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet and written with the same words, in which it states that -- in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1170 – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes and her son, viscount B[ernard] Ato VI, gave one slope [costa], situated at Torril to Peter of Ochau, for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions. – Witnesses of this thing are: Bernard Magister, Bertrand Guirald, and four others. Peter Petitus wrote [this] ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes,</em> 1.98-99, #229: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet, in which it is noted that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1170 – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes and her son, viscount B[ernard] Ato VI, gave one slope [costa], situated at Ugenas, to Poncia Andreva and her son Bernard, for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions. – Witnesses of this thing are: Bernard Magister, Bertrand Guirald, and four others. Peter Petiti wrote [this] ordered by both sides. Layettes, 1.99, #230: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet, in which it is noted that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1170 – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes and her son, viscount B[ernard] Ato VI, gave one slope [costa], situated at Torril, to Peter Raynald and his brother Stephen, for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions. – Witnesses of this thing are: Bernard Magister, Bertrand Guirald, and four others. Peter Petiti wrote [this] ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.99, #231: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet in the margin, in which it states that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1170, in the month of April – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes and her son, viscount B[ernard] Ato VI, gave one slope [costa], situated in the tithing district of St. Saturnine of Calvicio, in a place which is called Coinet, to Durand of Coirano and his successors, for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions. Witnesses of this thing are: William Benedict, who had three sous for it, Peter of Ochau and three others. Peter Petiti wrote [this] ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.99, #232: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet in the margin, in which it is noted that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1170, in the month of May – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes gave Bernard Laimund and his children and all his successors, for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions, one site of uncultivated land [pati] in the tithing district of Geneirac, in a place called Tortor. – Witnesses of this thing are: Aymeri who had 12 pennies, and Raynald, 4 pennies, Bernard Aymeri, 6 pennies, Giles Benedict, Peter Spethan and three others. Peter Petiti wrote [this] ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes,</em> 1.99, #233: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet in the margin, in which it states that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1171 – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes and Agde, gave two pieces of cleared land [bozigas] in the tithing district of Calvitio, in a place called Aureola, to Stephen Bedocio of Ornezes and his successors, for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions. Witnesses of this thing are: William Benedict, Peter of Ochau, and three others. Peter Petiti wrote [this] ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.99, #234: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet, in which it states that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1171 – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes, for herself and her son, gave one slope [costa], situated in a place called the Chairola, to Stephen Sperandeo, his stepmother Guillelma, and his children, William and Bernard and their successors, for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions. Witnesses of this thing are: William Benedict, Bernard Magister and three others. Peter Petiti wrote [this] ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.99 #235: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet in the margin, in which it states that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1171 – Guillelma, viscountess of Nimes and her son, viscount Bernard [Ato VI], gave that uncultivated land which is called the Shaved Slope [Costa pelada] to Peter of Coiran, Peter Pelica, Andreas, and William Radic, and all the others of the town of Radic who wished to have a part in said uncultivated land, and their successors, for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions. Witnesses of this thing are: William of Liveria, Bremond of Albasio, and six others. Peter Petiti wrote [this] ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes,</em> 1.104 #239. Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet, in which it states that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1172 – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes and Agde and viscount Bernard her son awarded and granted in perpetuity to William Baltugat, his wife Matelda, and their children, every feudal honor which Raynald of Boilanice, priest in the tithing distict of St. Felix of Boilanice, held from the viscountess of Nimes, paying for the award 100 Melgueil sous at this time and 5 sous of public money annually at the feast of St. Michael to be paid by himself and his successors in perpetuity. – Witness of this thing are: William of Vilari, William Gerald, and eight others. Peter Petiti wrote [this] ordered by both sides. <br><em>Layettes</em>, 1.109, #260: Chirograph, divided by letters of the alphabet in the upper and lower margin, in which it states that – in the year from the Lord’s incarnation, 1175, in the month of May – Guillelma viscountess of Nimes and Agde, and her son B[ernard] Ato, gave a certain piece of land situated in the tithing district of Amiglavo, in a place called Rega, to Peter Blanche and R. of Pullis for paid feudal exchange, with the customary conditions. Witnesses of this thing are: Peter Bernard Grataserps, Signer the elder, Peter Gerard, Peter of Champagne and his retainer Gerald, Bernard of Cumbis, William Richard. Peter Petiti, notary, wrote [this] ordered by both sides.</p><div class="field_box"><div class="field_content"></div></div>