---
woman_id: "26085"
title: "Agnes, daughter of Payn fitzJohn"
ititle: "agnes, daughter of payn fitzjohn"
draft: false
type: "woman"
birthdate: "c.1125"
deathdate: "1190-91"
social_title: "Lady"
created: "2017-12-17"
modified: "2021-03-27"
url: "/woman/26085.html"
sent:
  - url: letter/26086.html
    name: A letter to Public (1150-89, probably after 1185)
    iname: a letter to public (1150-89, probably after 1185)
  - url: letter/26087.html
    name: A letter to Public (1150-89, probably after 1185)
    iname: a letter to public (1150-89, probably after 1185)
  - url: letter/26089.html
    name: A letter to Public (1150-91)
    iname: a letter to public (1150-91)
  - url: letter/26088.html
    name: A letter to Public (1184-91)
    iname: a letter to public (1184-91)
received:
---
<h2 class="mt-4">Overview</h2><dt>Title social-status</dt><dd>Lady</dd><dt>Date of Birth</dt><dd>c.1125</dd><dt>Date of Death</dt><dd>1190-91</dd><h2 class="mt-4">Biography</h2><p>Agnes, born c.1125, was the daughter of Payn fitzJohn and Sibyl, sister of Geoffrey II Talbot.&nbsp; <i>The Chronicle of John of Worcester</i> says Payn had been one of Henry I’s chamberlains and sheriff of Shropshire and Hereford, who who died in 1137, fighting the Welsh along the border (3.228-29).&nbsp; &nbsp;Agnes and her sister Cecily were the heirs of Sibyl’s brother, Geoffey, who died in 1140, dividing the inheritance.&nbsp; When Cecily died, her estates passed to Agnes’s descendants (Sanders, <i>English Baronies</i>, 144).&nbsp; &nbsp;Agnes married first Warin de Mountchesney, who died c. 1162, then Haldenald de Bidun, who died before 1185.&nbsp; Agnes died 1190-91.</p><p>According to the <i>Rotuli de Dominabus et Pueris et Puellis</i>, Agnes had three sons, Ralph, William, both knights, &nbsp;and Hubert, a clerk, and two daughters, one of whom one was married to Stephen Glanvill, and the other to William Paynel (#116). &nbsp;(In one of her donations, #134, Agnes names a son-in-law, Robert of Mortimer, and a daughter, Alice.)&nbsp; The <i>Rotuli </i>has several entries listing her possessions:&nbsp; #83, her "vill" of Dinton is worth 22 pounds with the following stock:&nbsp; viz. 3 plough-teams, 200 sheep, 4 cows, one bull, 4 sows, and one boar; #116, she herself has 11 librates of land in Holkham, without stock, and her land in Holkham could sustain stock of one plough-team and 100 sheep, and then it would be worth 13 pounds.&nbsp; The land belongs to the fee of the earl of Sussex, and the above lady holds it of her son, Ralph (footnote 156 cites a torn round which suggests that her dower would have been in Oxborough or Didlington in South Greenhoe Hundred, the Domesday manors of her husband’s family).&nbsp; #126, Agnes de Mountchesney has Burgh in Clavering Hundred and it is worth 20 pounds per annum and belongs to the fee of Saint Etheldreda; #127, Agnes de Mountchesney has 16 librates of land in Sutton in Happing Hundred of the fee of Roger Bigod; #129, Agnes de Mountchesney has 16 librates of land in Sutton in Happing Hundred of the fee of Roger Bigod.&nbsp; Agnes made a number of donations to the church and abbey at Godstow, some specifically for the care of sick nuns.</p><p>The material in this biography is drawn from:&nbsp; <i>The Chronicle of John of Worcester</i>, v.3, <i>The Annals from 1067 to 1140</i>, ed. and trans. P. McGurk (Oxford, 1998); I.J. Sanders, <i>English Baronies:&nbsp; A Study of Their Origin and Descent, 1086-1327</i> (Oxford, 1960); John Walmsley, ed. trans., <i>Widows Heirs, and Heiresses in the Late Twelfth Century:&nbsp; The Rotuli de Dominabus et Pueris et Puellis </i>(Tempe, Arizona:&nbsp; ACMRS, 2006).&nbsp; &nbsp;Emilie Amt’s edition of <i>The Latin Cartulary of Godstow Abbey</i> (Oxford:&nbsp; Oxford University, 2014)&nbsp; and her article "The Foundation Legend of Godstow Abbey:&nbsp; A Holy Woman's Life in Anglo-Norman Verse." <em>Writing Medieval Woman's Lives,</em>&nbsp;ed. C.N. Goldy and A. LIvingstone (Palgrave, 2012), introduced me to Agnes.</p>